The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary
(part 1 of 4: A-D), by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Chambers's Twentieth Century Dictionary (part 1 of 4: A-D)

Author: Various

Editor: Thomas Davidson

Release Date: October 9, 2011 [EBook #37683]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S 20TH CENT. DICTIONARY. (A-D) ***




Produced by Keith Edkins, Colin Bell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors have been corrected: they
are listed at the end of the text.

       *       *       *       *       *


In this version [=e] signifies "e macron"; [)e] "e breve"; [.e] "e with dot
above"; and so forth.

CHAMBERS'S
TWENTIETH CENTURY DICTIONARY
OF THE
ENGLISH LANGUAGE

PRONOUNCING, EXPLANATORY, ETYMOLOGICAL, WITH COMPOUND PHRASES,
TECHNICAL TERMS IN USE IN THE ARTS AND SCIENCES,
COLLOQUIALISMS, FULL APPENDICES, AND
COPIOUSLY ILLUSTRATED

EDITED BY
REV. THOMAS DAVIDSON
ASSISTANT-EDITOR OF 'CHAMBERS'S ENCYCLOPÆDIA'
EDITOR OF 'CHAMBERS'S ENGLISH DICTIONARY'

LONDON: 47 Paternoster Row
W. & R. CHAMBERS, LIMITED
EDINBURGH: 339 High Street
1908

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAMBERS'S
NEW LARGE TYPE
ENGLISH DICTIONARY
EDITED BY
REV. THOMAS DAVIDSON
_Pronouncing_, _Explanatory_, _Etymological_
1264 pp. Imp. 8vo, cloth, 12/6; hf.-mor., 18/-
------
"The best one volume dictionary in existence."
W. & R. CHAMBERS, LIMITED, LONDON AND EDINBURGH.

       *       *       *       *       *


PREFACE.

This is the third English Dictionary which the present Editor has prepared,
and he may therefore lay claim to an unusually prolonged apprenticeship to
his trade. It is surely unnecessary for him to say that he believes this to
be the best book of the three, and he can afford to rest content if the
Courteous Reader receive it with the indulgence extended to his Library
Dictionary, published in the spring of 1898. It is based upon that work,
but will be found to possess many serviceable qualities of its own. It is
not much less in content, and its greater relative portability is due to
smaller type, to thinner paper, and still more to a rigorous compression
and condensation in the definitions, by means of which room has been found
for many additional words.

The aim has been to include all the common words in literary and
conversational English, together with words obsolete save in the pages of
Spenser, Shakespeare, Milton, and the Authorised Version of the Bible. An
attempt has been made also to include the common terms of the sciences and
the arts of life, the vocabulary of sport, those Scotch and provincial
words which assert themselves in Burns, Scott, the Brontës, and George
Eliot, and even the coinages of word-masters like Carlyle, Browning, and
Meredith. Numberless compound idiomatic phrases have also been given a
place, in each case under the head of the significant word.

Correctness in technical matters has been ensured by consulting such books
as Smyth's _Sailor's Word-Book_, Voyle's _Military Dictionary_, Wilson's
_Stock-Exchange Glossary_, Lee's _Glossary of Liturgical and Ecclesiastical
Terms_, &c. Besides books of this class, the Editor has made constant use
of special books such as Schmidt's _Shakespeare-Lexicon_, Calderwood's
edition of Fleming's _Vocabulary of Philosophy_, Jamieson's _Scottish
Dictionary_, the _Stanford Dictionary of Anglicised Words and Phrases_,
Yule and Burnell's _Anglo-Indian Glossary_, Addis and Arnold's _Catholic
Dictionary_, and the Dictionaries of the Bible of Sir William Smith and Dr
Hastings.

In Latin, his authority is Lewis and Short; in Greek, Liddell and Scott; in
Romance Philology, Diez and Scheler; in French, Littré; in Spanish,
Velazquez; in German, Weigand and Flügel; in Gaelic, Macleod and Dewar, and
M'Bain; in Hebrew, Gesenius.

In English etymology the Editor has consulted Professor Skeat's
_Dictionary_ and his _Principles of English Etymology_--First and Second
Series; the magistral _New English Dictionary_ of Dr James A. H. Murray and
Mr Henry Bradley, so far as completed; and the only less valuable _English
Dialect Dictionary_ of Professor Wright (begun 1896).

Two complete American _English Dictionaries_ still hold the first place as
works of reference, Professor Whitney's _Century Dictionary_ and Funk and
Wagnall's _Standard Dictionary_.

The Editor has great pleasure in acknowledging his personal obligations to
his brothers, the Rev. Robert P. Davidson, B.A., of Trinity College,
Oxford, and David G. Davidson, M.D., Edinburgh; and to his equally capable
and courteous colleagues, Mr J. R. Pairman and David Patrick, LL.D., Editor
of _Chambers's Encyclopædia_.

T. D.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTENTS.

                                                                   PAGE

  PREFACE                                                           iii

  EXPLANATIONS TO THE STUDENT                                         v

  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS DICTIONARY                     vii

  THE DICTIONARY                                                 1-1150

  PREFIXES AND SUFFIXES                                            1151

  ETYMOLOGY OF NAMES OF PLACES, ETC.                               1158

  LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS, TOGETHER WITH SIGNS AND SYMBOLS USED IN
  MEDICINE AND MUSIC                                               1161

  CORRECT CEREMONIOUS FORMS OF ADDRESS                             1174

  PRONOUNCING VOCABULARY OF SCRIPTURE PROPER NAMES                 1176

  THE MORE COMMON ENGLISH CHRISTIAN NAMES, WITH THEIR ORIGIN
  AND MEANING                                                      1178

  WORDS AND PHRASES IN MORE OR LESS CURRENT USE FROM LATIN,
  GREEK, AND MODERN FOREIGN LANGUAGES                              1184

  ADDENDA                                                          1208

       *       *       *       *       *


EXPLANATIONS TO THE STUDENT.

THE ARRANGEMENT OF THE WORDS.--Every word is given in its _alphabetical_
order, except in cases where, to save space, derivatives are given after
and under the words from which they are derived. Each uncompounded verb has
its participles, when irregular, placed after it. Exceptional plurals are
also given. When a word stands after another, with no meaning given, its
meanings can be at once formed from those of the latter, by adding the
signification of the affix: thus the meanings of _Darkness_ are obtained by
prefixing the meaning of _ness_, _state of being_, to those of _Dark_.

Many words from French and other tongues, current in English usage, but not
yet fairly Anglicised, are inserted in the list of Foreign Phrases, &c., at
the end, rather than in the body of the Dictionary.

THE PRONUNCIATION.--The Pronunciation is given immediately after each word,
by the word being spelled anew. In this new spelling, every consonant used
has its ordinary unvarying sound, _no consonant being employed that has
more than one sound_. The same sounds are always represented by the same
letters, no matter how varied their actual spelling in the language. No
consonant used has any mark attached to it, with the one exception of _th_,
which is printed in common letters when sounded as in _thick_, but in
italics when sounded as in _th_en. _Unmarked vowels_ have always their
short sounds, as in _lad_, _led_, _lid_, _lot_, _but_, _book_. The _marked
vowels_ are shown in the following line, which is printed at the top of
each page:--

f[=a]te, fär; m[=e], h[.e]r; m[=i]ne; m[=o]te; m[=u]te; m[=oo]n; _th_en.

The vowel _u_ when marked thus, _ü_, has the sound heard in Scotch _bluid_,
_gude_, the French _du_, almost that of the German _ü_ in _Müller_. Where
more than one pronunciation of a word is given, that which is placed first
is more accepted.

THE SPELLING.--When more than one form of a word is given, that which is
placed first is the spelling in current English use. Unfortunately our
modern spelling does not represent the English we actually speak, but
rather the language of the 16th century, up to which period, generally
speaking, English spelling was mainly phonetic, like the present German.
The fundamental principle of all rational spelling is no doubt the
representation of every sound by an invariable symbol, but in modern
English the usage of pronunciation has drifted far from the conventional
forms established by a traditional orthography, with the result that the
present spelling of our written speech is to a large extent a mere exercise
of memory, full of confusing anomalies and imperfections, and involving an
enormous and unnecessary strain on the faculties of learners. Spelling
reform is indeed an imperative necessity, but it must proceed with a wise
moderation, for, in the words of Mr Sweet, 'nothing can be done without
unanimity, and until the majority of the community are convinced of the
superiority of some one system unanimity is impossible.' The true path of
progress should follow such wisely moderate counsels as those of Dr J. A.
H. Murray:--the dropping of the final or inflexional silent _e_; the
restoration of the historical _-t_ after breath consonants; uniformity in
the employment of double consonants, as in _traveler_, &c.; the discarding
of _ue_ in words like _demagogue_ and _catalogue_; the uniform levelling of
the agent _-our_ into _-or_; the making of _ea = [)e]_ short into _e_ and
the long _ie_ into _ee_; the restoration of _some_, _come_, _tongue_, to
their old English forms, _sum_, _cum_, _tung_; a more extended use of _z_
in the body of words, as _chozen_, _praize_, _raize_; and the correction of
the worst individual monstrosities, as _foreign_, _scent_, _scythe_,
_ache_, _debt_, _people_, _parliament_, _court_, _would_, _sceptic_,
_phthisis_, _queue_, _schedule_, _twopence-halfpenny_, _yeoman_, _sieve_,
_gauge_, _barque_, _buoy_, _yacht_, &c.

Already in America a moderate degree of spelling reform may be said to be
established in good usage, by the adoption of _-or_ for _-our_, as _color_,
_labor_, &c.; of _-er_ for _-re_, as _center_, _meter_, &c.; _-ize_ for
_-ise_, as _civilize_, &c.; the use of a uniform single consonant after an
unaccented vowel, as _traveler_ for _traveller_; the adoption of _e_ for
_oe_ or _æ_ in _hemorrhage_, _diarrhea_, &c.

THE MEANINGS.--The current and most important meaning of a word is usually
given first. But in cases like _Clerk_, _Livery_, _Marshal_, where the
force of the word can be made much clearer by tracing its history, the
original meaning is also given, and the successive variations of its usage
defined.

THE ETYMOLOGY.--The Etymology of each word is given after the meanings,
within brackets. Where further information regarding a word is given
elsewhere, it is so indicated by a reference. It must be noted under the
etymology that whenever a word is printed thus, BAN, BASE, the student is
referred to it; also that here the sign--is always to be read as meaning
'derived from.' Examples are generally given of words that are cognate or
correspond to the English words; but it must be remembered that they are
inserted merely for illustration. Such words are usually separated from the
rest by a semicolon. For instance, when an English word is traced to its
Anglo-Saxon form, and then a German word is given, no one should suppose
that our English word is derived from the German. German and Anglo-Saxon
are alike branches from a common Teutonic stem, and have seldom borrowed
from each other. Under each word the force of the prefix is usually given,
though not the affix. For fuller explanation in such cases the student is
referred to the list of Prefixes and Suffixes in the Appendix.

       *       *       *       *       *


LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THIS DICTIONARY.

  _aor._                    aorist.
  _abbrev._                 abbreviation.
  _abl._                    ablative.
  _acc._                    according.
  _accus._                  accusative.
  _adj._                    adjective.
  _adv._                    adverb.
  _agri._                   agriculture.
  _alg._                    algebra.
  _anat._                   anatomy.
  _app._                    apparently.
  _arch._                   archaic.
  _archit._                 architecture.
  _arith._                  arithmetic.
  _astrol._                 astrology.
  _astron._                 astronomy.
  _attrib._                 attributive.
  _augm._                   augmentative.
  _B._                      Bible.
  _biol._                   biology.
  _book-k._                 book-keeping.
  _bot._                    botany.
  _c._ (_circa_)            about.
  _c._, _cent._             century.
  _carp._                   carpentry.
  _cf._                     compare.
  _chem._                   chemistry.
  _cog._                    cognate.
  _coll._, _colloq._        colloquially.
  _comp._                   comparative.
  _conch._                  conchology.
  _conj._                   conjunction.
  _conn._                   connected.
  _contr._                  contracted.
  _cook._                   cookery.
  _corr._                   corruption.
  _crystal._                crystallography.
  _dat._                    dative.
  _demons._                 demonstrative.
  _der._                    derivation.
  _dial._                   dialect, dialectal.
  _Dict._                   Dictionary.
  _dim._                    diminutive.
  _dub._                    doubtful.
  _eccles._                 ecclesiastical history.
  _e.g._                    for example.
  _elect._                  electricity.
  _entom._                  entomology.
  _esp._                    especially.
  _ety._                    etymology.
  _fem._                    feminine.
  _fig._                    figuratively.
  _fol._                    followed; following.
  _fort._                   fortification.
  _freq._                   frequentative.
  _fut._                    future.
  _gen._                    genitive.
  _gener._                  generally.
  _geog._                   geography.
  _geol._                   geology.
  _geom._                   geometry.
  _ger._                    gerundive.
  _gram._                   grammar.
  _gun._                    gunnery.
  _her._                    heraldry.
  _hist._                   history.
  _hort._                   horticulture.
  _hum._                    humorous.
  _i.e._                    that is.
  _imit._                   imitative.
  _imper._                  imperative.
  _impers._                 impersonal.
  _indic._                  indicative.
  _infin._                  infinitive.
  _inten._                  intensive.
  _interj._                 interjection.
  _interrog._               interrogative.
  _jew._                    jewellery.
  _lit._                    literally.
  _mach._                   machinery.
  _masc._                   masculine.
  _math._                   mathematics.
  _mech._                   mechanics.
  _med._                    medicine.
  _metaph._                 metaphysics.
  _mil._                    military.
  _Milt._                   Milton.
  _min._                    mineralogy.
  _mod._                    modern.
  _Mt._                     Mount.
  _mus._                    music.
  _myth._                   mythology.
  _n._, _ns._               noun, nouns.
  _nat. hist._              natural history.
  _naut._                   nautical.
  _neg._                    negative.
  _neut._                   neuter.
  _n.pl._                   noun plural.
  _n.sing._                 noun singular.
  _N.T._                    New Testament.
  _obs._                    obsolete.
  _opp._                    opposed.
  _opt._                    optics.
  _orig._                   originally.
  _ornith._                 ornithology.
  _O.S._                    old style.
  _O.T._                    Old Testament.
  _p._, _part._             participle.
  _p.adj._                  participial adjective.
  _paint._                  painting.
  _paleog._                 paleography.
  _paleon._                 paleontology.
  _palm._                   palmistry.
  _pa.p._                   past participle.
  _pass._                   passive.
  _pa.t._                   past tense.
  _path._                   pathology.
  _perf._                   perfect.
  _perh._                   perhaps.
  _pers._                   person.
  _pfx._                    prefix.
  _phil._, _philos._        philosophy.
  _philol._                 philology.
  _phon._                   phonetics.
  _phot._                   photography.
  _phrenol._                phrenology.
  _phys._                   physics.
  _physiol._                physiology.
  _pl._                     plural.
  _poet._                   poetical.
  _pol. econ._              political economy.
  _poss._                   possessive.
  _Pr.Bk._                  Book of Common
                            Prayer.
  _pr.p._                   present participle.
  _prep._                   preposition.
  _pres._                   present.
  _print._                  printing.
  _priv._                   privative.
  _prob._                   probably.
  _Prof._                   Professor.
  _pron._                   pronoun;
                            pronounced;
                            pronunciation.
  _prop._                   properly.
  _pros._                   prosody.
  _prov._                   provincial.
  _q.v._                    which see.
  _R.C._                    Roman Catholic.
  _recip._                  reciprocal.
  _redup._                  reduplication.
  _refl._                   reflexive.
  _rel._                    related; relative.
  _rhet._                   rhetoric.
  _sculp._                  sculpture.
  _Shak._                   Shakespeare.
  _sig._                    signifying.
  _sing._                   singular.
  _spec._                   specifically.
  _Spens_.                  Spenser.
  _subj._                   subjunctive.
  _suff._                   suffix.
  _superl._                 superlative.
  _surg._                   surgery.
  _term._                   termination.
  _teleg._                  telegraphy.
  _Tenn._                   Tennyson.
  _Test._                   Testament.
  _theat._                  theatre; theatricals.
  _theol._                  theology.
  _trig._                   trigonometry.
  _ult._                    ultimately.
  _v.i._                    verb intransitive.
  _voc._                    vocative.
  _v.t._                    verb transitive.
  _vul._                    vulgar.
  _zool._                   zoology.

       *       *       *       *       *

  Amer.       American.
  Ar.         Arabic.
  A.S.        Anglo-Saxon.
  Austr.      Australian.
  Bav.        Bavarian.
  Beng.       Bengali.
  Bohem.      Bohemian.
  Braz.       Brazilian.
  Bret.       Breton.
  Carib.      Caribbean.
  Celt.       Celtic.
  Chal.       Chaldean.
  Chin.       Chinese.
  Corn.       Cornish.
  Dan.        Danish.
  Dut.        Dutch.
  Egypt.      Egyptian.
  Eng.        English.
  Finn.       Finnish.
  Flem.       Flemish.
  Fr.         French.
  Fris.       Frisian.
  Gael.       Gaelic.
  Ger.        German.
  Goth.       Gothic.
  Gr.         Greek.
  Heb.        Hebrew.
  Hind.       Hindustani.
  Hung.       Hungarian.
  Ice.        Icelandic.
  Ind.        Indian.
  Ion.        Ionic.
  Ir.         Irish.
  It.         Italian.
  Jap.        Japanese.
  Jav.        Javanese.
  L.          Latin.
  Lith.       Lithuanian.
  L. L.       Low or Late Latin.
  M. E.       Middle English.
  Mex.        Mexican.
  Norm.       Norman.
  Norw.       Norwegian.
  O. Fr.      Old French.
  Pers.       Persian.
  Peruv.      Peruvian.
  Pol.        Polish.
  Port.       Portuguese.
  Prov.       Provençal.
  Rom.        Romance.
  Russ.       Russian
  Sans.       Sanskrit.
  Scand.      Scandinavian.
  Scot.       Scottish.
  Singh.      Singhalese.
  Slav.       Slavonic.
  Sp.         Spanish.
  Sw.         Swedish.
  Teut.       Teutonic.
  Turk.       Turkish.
  U.S.        United States.
  W.          Welsh.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAMBERS'S
TWENTIETH CENTURY
DICTIONARY.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

the first letter in our alphabet, its corresponding symbol standing first
also in many other alphabets derived from the Phoenician. It originated in
the hieroglyphic picture of an eagle (Old Egyptian _ahom_), the cursive
hieratic form of which was the original of the Phoenician _aleph_, an ox,
from a fancied resemblance to its head and horns.--A, as a note in music,
is the major sixth of the scale of C; A1, the symbol by which first-class
vessels are classed in Lloyd's Register of British and Foreign Shipping,
hence first-rate.

A, the indefinite article, a broken-down form of An, and used before words
beginning with the sound of a consonant. [_An_ was a new development, after
the Conquest, of the A.S. numeral _án_, one.]

A, ä or [=a], a _prep._, derived from the old prep. _on_, and still used,
as a prefix, in _a_foot, _a_field, _a_part, _a_sleep, now_a_days,
twice-_a_-day; also with verbal nouns, as _a_-building, to be _a_-doing, to
set _a_-going. It is now admitted only colloquially. [Short for A.S. _an_,
a dialectic form of _on_, on, in, at. See PREFIXES.]

A, ä, a dialectic corruption of _he_ or _she_, as in quoth_a_, (_Shak._)
'_A_ babbled of green fields.'--A, usually written _a'_, Scotch for _all_;
A, a form of the L. prep. _ab_, from, of, used before consonants, as in
Thomas _à_ Kempis, Thomas _à_ Becket, &c.

AARDVARK, ard'vark, _n._ the ground-hog of South Africa. [Dut. _aarde_,
earth; _vark_, found only in dim. _varken_, a pig.]

AARDWOLF, ard'w[=oo]lf, _n._ the earth-wolf of South Africa, a carnivore
belonging to a sub-family of the Hyænidæ. [Dut. _aarde_, earth, _wolf_,
wolf.]

AARONIC, -AL, [=a]-ron'ik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to AARON, the Jewish
high-priest, or to his priesthood.--_n._ AA'RON'S-ROD (_archit._), a rod
having one serpent twined round it.--AARON'S BEARD, a popular name for a
number of cultivated plants--among the best known, a species of Saxifrage
(_S. sarmentosa_), usually grown in hanging pots, from which hang long
stems, bearing clumps of roundish, hairy leaves.

AB, ab, _n._ the eleventh month of the Jewish civil year, and the fifth of
the ecclesiastical year, answering to parts of July and August. [Syriac.]

ABA, ab'a, _n._ a Syrian woollen stuff, of goat's or camel's hair, usually
striped; an outer garment made of this. [Ar.]

ABACA, ab'a-ka, _n._ the native name of the so-called Manilla hemp of
commerce--really a plantain, much grown in the Philippine Islands.

ABACK, a-bak', _adv._ (_naut._) said of sails pressed backward against the
mast by the wind--hence (_fig._) TAKEN ABACK, taken by surprise, [A.S. _on
bæc._ See ON and BACK.]

ABACOT. See BYCOCKET.

ABACTINAL, ab-ak'ti-nal, _adj._ (_zool._) remote from the actinal area,
without rays.--_adv._ ABAC'TINALLY.

ABACTION, ab-ak'shun, _n._ (_law_) the stealing of a number of cattle at
once.--_n._ ABAC'TOR, one who does this. [L. _abig[)e]re_, _abactum_, to
drive off.]

[Illustration]

ABACUS, ab'a-kus, _n._ a counting-frame or table: (_archit._) a level
tablet on the capital of a column, supporting the entablature:--_pl._
AB'AC[=I].--_ns._ ABACIS'CUS, ABAC'ULUS, dims. of ABACUS; AB'ACIST, one who
counts with the abacus. [L.--Gr. _abax_, _abakos_, a board for reckoning
on.]

ABADDON, a-bad'don, _n._ the destroyer, or angel of the bottomless pit:
(_Milton_) the bottomless pit, or abyss of hell itself. [Heb., from
_[=a]bad_, to be lost.]

ABAFT, a-baft', _adv._ and _prep._ on the aft, hind, or stern part of a
ship: behind. [Pfx. _a-_, for A.S. _on_, on, and _bæftan_, after, behind;
itself made up of pfx. _be-_, and _æftan_. See AFT.]

ABALIENATE, ab-[=a]l'yen-[=a]t, _v.t._ Same as ALIENATE.

ABANDON, a-ban'dun, _v.t._ to give up: to desert: to yield (one's self)
without restraint (with _to_).--_v.t._ ABAND' (_Spens._), to abandon.--_n._
ABAN'DON (_n_ to be nasalised), freedom from conventional restraints:
careless freedom of manners.--_adj._ ABAN'DONED, given up, as to a vice:
profligate: completely deserted: very wicked.--_adv._ ABAN'DONEDLY.--_n._
ABAN'DONMENT, act of abandoning: state of being given up: enthusiastic
surrender of self to a cause: (_law_) the renunciation of a claim. [O. Fr.
_bandon_, from the Teut. root _ban_, proclamation, came to mean decree,
authorisation, permission; hence _à bandon_--at will or discretion,
_abandonner_, to give up to the will or disposal of some one. See BAN,
BANNS.]

ABASE, a-b[=a]s', _v.t._ to cast down: to humble: to degrade.--_adjs._
AB[=A]'SED, ABAISSÉ (_her._), depressed.--_n._ ABASE'MENT, state of
humiliation. [O. Fr. _abaissier_, to bring low--L. _ad_, to, and root of
BASE, adj.]

ABASH, a-bash', _v.t._ to confuse with shame or guilt.--_pa.p._ ABASHED'
(with _at_, of an occasion; _by_, of a cause).--_n._ ABASH'MENT, confusion
from shame. [O. Fr. _esbhir_ (Fr. _s'ébahir_), pr.p. _esbahiss-ant_, to be
amazed--L. _ex_, out, and interj. _bah_, expressive of astonishment.]

ABATE, a-b[=a]t', _v.t._ to lessen: to deduct (with _of_): to mitigate:
(_law_) to put an end to, do away with, as of an action or a nuisance, to
render null, as a writ.--_v.i._ to grow less.--_adjs._ AB[=A]T'ABLE,
capable of being abated; AB[=A]T'ED, beaten down or cut away, as the
background of an ornamental pattern in relief.--_n._ ABATE'MENT, the act of
abating: the sum or quantity abated: (_law_) the act of intruding on a
freehold and taking possession before the heir, the abandonment of an
action, or the reduction of a legacy: (_her._) a supposed mark of dishonour
on a coat of arms--apparently never actually used.--ABATED ARMS, those
whose edges have been blunted for the tournament. [O. Fr. _abatre_, to beat
down--L. _ab_, from, and _bat[)e]re_, popular form of _batu[)e]re_, to
beat: conn. with BEAT.]

ABATIS, ABATTIS, a'bat-is, _n.sing._ and _pl._ (_fort._) a rampart of trees
felled and laid side by side, with the branches towards the enemy. [Fr. See
ABATE.]

ABATTOIR, a-bat-wär', _n._ a public slaughter-house. [Fr. See ety. of
ABATE.]

ABATURE, ab'a-t[=u]r, _n._ the trail of a beast of the chase. [Fr.]

ABB, ab, _n._ properly woof- or weft-yarn, but sometimes warp-yarn. [Pfx.
_a-_, and WEB.]

ABBA, ab'a, _n._ father, a term retained in the Gr. text of the New
Testament, together with its translation 'father,' hence _Abba father_,
applied to God the Father: also a bishop in the Syriac and Coptic Churches.
[L.--Gr.--Syriac and Chaldee, _abb[=a]_--Heb. _ab_, father.]

ABBACY, ab'a-si, _n._ the office or dignity of an abbot: the establishment
under an abbot: an abbey.--_adj._ ABB[=A]'TIAL. [The earlier form was
_abbatie_--said by Dr Murray to have been originally a Scotch form.]

ABBATE, ab-bä'te, _n._ a title loosely applied to ecclesiastics in
Italy.--Also ABATE. [It.]

ABBAYE, an _arch._ form of ABBEY.

ABBÉ, ab'[=a], _n._ originally the French name for an abbot, but often used
in the general sense of a priest or clergyman. Before the Revolution, abbés
were often merely holders of benefices, enjoying a portion of the revenues,
although in minor orders, or even laymen. They were often tutors in noble
families, or men of letters, and were marked by a short violet-coloured
robe.

ABBESS, ab'es, _n._ the female superior of a religious community of women.
[Earlier ABBATESS, fem. of ABBOT.]

ABBEY, ab'e, _n._ a monastery of persons of either sex presided over by an
abbot or abbess: the church now or formerly attached to it: in Newstead
_Abbey_, &c., the name has been retained after the abbatial building had
become a private house:--_pl._ ABB'EYS. [O. Fr. _abaïe_ (Fr. _abbaye_)--L.
_abbatia_, See ABBA.]

ABBOT, ab'ut, _n._ the father or head of an abbey:--_fem._ ABB'ESS.--_n._
AB'BOTSHIP. [L. _abbas_, _abbatis_--ABBA.]

ABBREVIATE, ab-br[=e]'vi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make brief or short: to
abridge.--_ns._ ABBREVI[=A]'TION, ABBR[=E]'VIATURE, a shortening, a part of
a word put for the whole; ABBR[=E]'VIATOR, one who abbreviates.--_adj._
ABBR[=E]'VIATORY. [L. _abbrevi[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ab_, intensive, and
_brevis_, short. See BRIEF.]

ABC, ABCEE, [=a]-b[=e]-s[=e]', _n._ the alphabet from its first letters: a
first reading-book (_obs._), hence _fig._ the first rudiments of
anything.--ABC BOOK (_Shak._), a book to teach the _a_, _b_, _c_, or
alphabet.

ABDICATE, ab'di-k[=a]t, _v.t._ and _v.i._ formally to renounce or give up
office or dignity.--_adj._ AB'DICANT.--_n._ ABDIC[=A]'TION. [L. _ab_, from
or off, _dic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to proclaim.]

ABDOMEN, ab-d[=o]'men, _n._ the belly: the lower part of the trunk.--_adj._
ABDOM'INAL.--_adv._ ABDOM'INALLY.--_adj._ ABDOM'INOUS, pot-bellied. [L.]

ABDUCE, ab-d[=u]s', _v.t._ an earlier form of ABDUCT.--_adj._ ABDUC'ENT,
drawing back: separating. [L. _abduc[)e]re_--_ab_, from _duc[)e]re_,
_ductum_, to draw.]

ABDUCT, ab-dukt', _v.t._ to take away by fraud or violence.--_ns._
ABDUC'TION, the carrying away, esp. of a person by fraud or force;
ABDUC'TOR, one guilty of abduction: a muscle that draws away. [L.
_abduc[)e]re_. See ABDUCE.]

ABEAM, a-b[=e]m', _adv._ (_naut._) on the beam, or in a line at right
angles to a vessel's length. [Pfx. _a-_ (A.S. _on_), on, and BEAM.]

ABEAR, a-b[=a]r', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to bear, to behave: (_prov._) to endure
or tolerate.--_n._ ABEAR'ANCE, (_obs._) behaviour. [A.S. pfx. _a-_, and
BEAR.]

ABECEDARIAN, [=a]-be-se-d[=a]'ri-an, _adj._ pertaining to the a, b, c:
rudimentary.--ABECEDARIAN PSALMS (as the 119th) or HYMNS are such as are
divided into successive portions according to the letters of the alphabet.

ABED, a-bed', _adv._ in bed. [Pfx. _a-_, on, and BED.]

ABELE, a-b[=e]l', _n._ the white poplar-tree. [Dut. _abeel_; O. Fr. _abel_,
_aubel_--Late L. _albellus_, _albus_, white.]

ABERDEVINE, ab-[.e]r-de-v[=i]n', _n._ a bird-fancier's name for the siskin.
[Ety. uncertain; prob. a fanciful coinage.]

ABERRATE, ab'[.e]r-r[=a]t, _v.i._ to wander or deviate from the right
way:--_pr.p._ ab'err[=a]ting; _pa.p._ ab'err[=a]ted.--_ns._ ABER'RANCE,
ABER'RANCY (_rare forms_).--_adj._ ABER'RANT (_zool._ and _bot._),
wandering, deviating in some particulars from its group.--_n._
ABERR[=A]'TION, a wandering from the right path: deviation from truth or
rectitude: in science, deviation from the type: abnormal structure or
development.--ABERRATION OF LIGHT, an apparent alteration in the place of a
star, arising from the motion of the earth in its orbit, combined with the
progressive passage of light. [L. _aberr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ab_, from,
_err[=a]re_, to wander.]

ABET, a-bet', _v.t._ to incite by encouragement or aid (used chiefly in a
bad sense):--_pr.p._ abet'ting; _pa.p._ abet'ted.--_ns._ ABET'MENT;
ABET'TER, ABET'TOR, one who abets. [O. Fr. _abeter_--_à_ (--L. _ad_, to),
and _beter_, to bait, from root of BAIT.]

ABEYANCE, a-b[=a]'ans, _n._ a state of suspension or expectation: temporary
inactivity--also ABEY'ANCY.--The _v._ to ABEY is rare. [Fr.--_à_ (--L.
_ad_, to), and _bayer_, to gape in expectation, from imitative root _ba_,
to gape.]

ABHOMINABLE, an earlier spelling of ABOMINABLE.

ABHOR, ab-hor', _v.t._ to shrink from with horror: to detest: to
loathe:--_pr.p._ abhor'ring; _pa.p._ abhorred'.--_ns._ ABHOR'RENCE, extreme
hatred; (_obs._) ABHOR'RENCY.--_adj._ ABHOR'RENT, detesting; repugnant
(with _of_).--_ns._ ABHOR'RER, one who abhors; ABHOR'RING (_B._ and
_Shak._), object of abhorrence. [L. _abhorr[=e]re_, from _ab_, from, and
_horr[=e]re_. See HORROR.]

ABIB, [=a]'bib, _n._ the first month of the Jewish ecclesiastical, the
seventh of the civil year, later called Nisan, answering to parts of March
and April. [Heb., 'an ear of corn'--_[=a]bab_, to produce early fruit.]

ABIDE, a-b[=i]d', _v.t._ to bide or wait for: to endure: to
tolerate.--_v.i._ to remain in a place, dwell or stay:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._
ab[=o]de'.--_n._ ABID'ANCE.--_adj._ ABID'ING, continual.--_n._ an
enduring.--_adv._ ABID'INGLY. [A.S. _ábídan_--pfx. _á-_ (= Goth. _us_ =
Ger. _er_), and _bídan_, to wait.]

ABIDE, a-b[=i]d', _v.t._ (_Shak._ and _Milton_) to redeem, pay the penalty
for, suffer. [M. E. _abyen_, confounded with ABIDE. See ABY.]

ABIES, ab'i-ez, _n._ the silver-fir.--_adj._ ABIET'IC, pertaining to trees
of the genus Abies. [L.]

ABIGAIL, ab'i-g[=a]l, _n._ a lady's-maid. [From _Abigail_, 1 Sam. xxv.]

ABILITY, a-bil'i-ti, _n._ quality of being able: power: strength:
skill.--_n.pl._ ABIL'ITIES, the powers of the mind. [O. Fr. _ableté_ (Fr.
_habileté_)--L. _habilitas_--_habilis_, easily handled, from _hab[=e]re_,
to have, hold. See ABLE.]

ABINTESTATE, ab-in-tes't[=a]t, _adj._ inheriting the estate of one who died
without having made a will. [L. _ab_, from, and INTESTATE.]

ABIOGENESIS, ab-i-o-jen'es-is, _n._ the origination of living by not-living
matter, spontaneous generation.--_adj._ ABIOGENET'IC--_n._ ABIO'GENIST, one
who believes in such. [Coined by Huxley in 1870; Gr. _a_, neg., _bios_,
life, _genesis_, birth.]

ABJECT, ab-jekt', _v.t._ (_obs._) to throw or cast down or away. [L.
_abjic[)e]re_, _-jectum_--_ab_, away, _jac[)e]re_, to throw.]

ABJECT, ab'jekt, _adj._ cast away: mean: worthless: cowering: base.--_n._
an outcast.--_ns._ ABJEC'TION, AB'JECTNESS, a mean or low state: baseness:
degradation.--_adv._ AB'JECTLY. [L. _abjectus_, cast away--_ab_, away,
_jac[)e]re_, to throw.]

ABJUDGE, ab-juj', _v.t._ (_rare_) to take away by judicial sentence. [L.
_ab_, from, and JUDGE.]

ABJUDICATE, ab-j[=oo]'di-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to give by judgment from one to
another. [L. _ab_, from, and JUDICATE.]

ABJURE, ab-j[=oo]r', _v.t._ to renounce on oath or solemnly: to recant: to
repudiate.--_n._ ABJUR[=A]'TION, official renunciation on oath of any
principle or pretension.--_adj._ ABJUR'ATORY.--_n._ ABJUR'ER. [L. _ab_,
from, _jur[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to swear.]

ABKARI, ab-kä'ri, _n._ the manufacture or sale of spirituous liquors: the
excise duty levied on such.--Also ABKA'RY. [Pers.]

ABLACTATION, ab-lak-t[=a]'shun, _n._ a weaning. [L. _ab_, from,
_lact[=a]re_, to suckle--_lac_, _lactis_, milk.]

ABLATION, ab-l[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of carrying away: (_geol._) the
wearing away of rock by the action of water.--_adj._ ABLATI'TIOUS. [L.
_ab_, from, _latum_, supine of _ferre_, to bear.]

ABLATIVE, ab'lat-iv, _adj._ used as a noun. The name applied to one of the
cases in the declension of nouns and pronouns in the Indo-European
languages, retained as in Latin and Sanskrit, or merged in another case, as
in the genitive in Greek. Its meaning was to express _direction from_ or
_time when_.--_adj._ ABLAT[=I]'VAL. [L. _ablativus_--_ab_, from, _ferre_,
_latum_, to take; as if it indicated taking away, or privation.]

ABLAUT, ab'lowt, _n._ (_philol._) vowel permutation, a substitution of one
root vowel for another in derivation, as in s_i_ng, s_a_ng, s_o_ng, s_u_ng,
distinct from the phonetic influence of a succeeding vowel, as in the
Umlaut. It is especially the change of a vowel to indicate tense-change in
strong verbs. [Ger., from _ab_, off, and _laut_, sound.]

ABLAZE, a-bl[=a]z', _adj._ in a blaze, on fire: gleaming brightly. [Prep.
_a_, and BLAZE.]

ABLE, [=a]'bl, _adj._ (comp. A'BLER; superl. A'BLEST) having sufficient
strength, power, or means to do a thing: skilful.--_adj._ A'BLE-BOD'IED, of
a strong body: free from disability, of a sailor, labourer, &c.:
robust.--_adv._ A'BLY. [See ABILITY.]

ABLEGATE, ab'le-g[=a]t, _n._ a papal envoy who carries the insignia of
office to a newly-appointed cardinal.

ABLOOM, a-bl[=oo]m', _adv._ in a blooming state. [Prep. _a_, on, and
BLOOM.]

ABLUENT, ab'l[=oo]-ent, _adj._ washing or cleaning by a liquid.--_n._ a
medicine which carries off impurities from the system. [L. _abluens_,
_-entis_, pr.p. of _ablu[)e]re_, to wash away--_ab_, from, away, and
_lu[)e]re_ = _lav[=a]re_, to wash. See LAVE.]

ABLUTION, ab-l[=oo]'shun, _n._ act of washing, esp. the body, preparatory
to religious rites: any ceremonial washing, symbolic of moral purification:
the wine and water used to rinse the chalice, drunk by the officiating
priest.--_adj._ ABLU'TIONARY. [L. _ablutio_--_ab_, away, _lu[)e]re_ =
_lav[=a]re_, to wash.]

ABNEGATE, ab'ne-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to deny.--_ns._ ABNEG[=A]'TION,
renunciation; AB'NEGATOR, one who abnegates or renounces. [L. _ab_, away,
and _neg[=a]re_, to deny.]

ABNORMAL, ab-nor'mal, _adj._ not normal or according to rule:
irregular--also ABNOR'MOUS.--_ns._ ABNORMAL'ITY, ABNOR'MITY.--_adv._
ABNOR'MALLY. [L. _ab_, away from, and NORMAL.]

ABOARD, a-b[=o]rd', _adv._ or _prep._ on board: in a ship, or in a train
(_Amer._). [Prep. _a_, on, and BOARD.]

ABOCOCKE. See BYCOCKET.

ABODE, a-b[=o]d', _n._ a dwelling-place: stay. [See ABIDE.]

ABODE, a-b[=o]d', _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of ABIDE.

ABODEMENT, a-b[=o]d'ment, _n._ (_obs._) a foreboding: an omen. [From ABODE,
with suff. _-ment_. See BODE, FOREBODE.]

ABOLISH, ab-ol'ish, _v.t._ to put an end to: to annul.--_adj._
ABOL'ISHABLE, capable of being abolished.--_ns._ ABOL'ISHMENT (_rare_);
ABOLI'TION, the act of abolishing; ABOLI'TIONISM, advocacy of abolitionist
principles; ABOLI'TIONIST, one who seeks to abolish anything, esp. slavery.
[Fr. _abolir_, _aboliss_--from L. _abol[=e]re_, _-itum_--_ab_, from,
_ol[=e]re_, to grow. The prep. _ab_ here reverses the meaning of the simple
verb.]

ABOMASUS, ab-[=o]-m[=a]'sus, _n._ the fourth stomach of ruminants, lying
close to the omasum or third stomach.--Also ABOM[=A]'SUM. [L. _ab_, and
_omasum_, paunch.]

ABOMINATE, ab-om'in-[=a]t, _v.t._ to abhor: to detest extremely.--_adj._
ABOM'INABLE, hateful: detestable, an old spelling is ABHOM'INABLE, to agree
with a fancied etymology in Lat. _ab homine_.--_n._
ABOM'INABLENESS.--_adv._ ABOM'INABLY.--_n._ ABOMIN[=A]'TION, extreme
aversion: anything disgusting or detestable. [L. _abomin[=a]ri_,
_-[=a]tus_, to turn from as of bad omen. See OMEN.]

ABORD, a-b[=o]rd', _v.t._ (_arch._) to accost: (_Spens._) astray, at a
loss.--_n._ (_Spens._) harbour: act of approaching: manner of approach.
[Fr. _aborder_, _à bord_. See ABOARD and BORDER.]

ABORIGINAL, ab-o-rij'in-al, _adj._ first, primitive, indigenous.--_adv._
ABORIG'INALLY.

ABORIGINES, ab-o-rij'in-[=e]z, _n.pl._ the original inhabitants of a
country. [L. See ORIGIN.]

ABORT, ab-ort', _v.i._ to miscarry in birth: to remain in a rudimentary
state.--_n._ ABOR'TION, premature delivery, or the procuring of such:
anything that does not reach maturity: a mis-shapen being or
monster.--_adj._ ABORT'IVE, born untimely: unsuccessful: producing nothing:
brought forth in an imperfect condition: rudimentary.--_adv._
ABORT'IVELY.--_n._ ABORT'IVENESS. [L. _abor[=i]ri_, _abortus_--_ab_, from,
away, _or[=i]ri_, to rise.]

ABOUND, ab-ownd', _v.i._ to overflow, be in great plenty: to possess in
plenty (with _in_): to be filled with (used with _with_). [O. Fr.
_abunder_--L. _abund[=a]re_, to overflow, _ab_, from, _unda_, a wave.]

ABOUT, a-bowt', _prep._ round on the outside: around: here and there in:
near to: concerning: engaged in.--_adv._ around: nearly: here and
there.--BRING ABOUT, to cause to take place; COME ABOUT, to take place; GO
ABOUT, to prepare to do; PUT ABOUT, disturbed; TO BE ABOUT, to be astir;
TURN ABOUT, alternately. [A.S. _on bútan_; _on_, in, _bútan_, without,
itself compounded of _be_, by, and _útan_, locative of _út_, out.]

ABOVE, a-buv', _prep._ on the upside: higher than: more than.--_adv._
overhead: in a higher position, order, or power.--_adjs._ ABOVE'-BOARD,
open, honourable; ABOVE'-GROUND, alive: not buried. [A.S. _ábúfan_--_á_,
on, _bufan_, above, itself compounded of _be_, by, _ufan_, high, upwards,
prop. the locative of _uf_, up.]

ABRACADABRA, ab-ra-ka-dab'ra, _n._ a cabbalistic word, written in
successive lines, each shorter by a letter than the one above it, till the
last letter A formed the apex of a triangle. It was worn as a charm for the
cure of diseases. Now used generally for a spell or conjuring word: mere
gibberish. [First found in 2d-cent. poem (_Præcepta de Medicina_) by Q.
Serenus Sammonicus; further origin unknown.]

ABRADE, ab-r[=a]d', _v.t._ to scrape or rub off: to wear down by friction.
[L. _ab_, off, _rad[)e]re_, _rasum_, to scrape.]

ABRAHAM-MAN, [=a]'bra-ham-man, _n._ originally a lunatic beggar from
Bethlehem Hospital in London, marked by a special badge. Many sturdy
beggars assumed this, hence the phrase TO SHAM ABRAHAM, to feign sickness,
still used among sailors. [The wards in the old Bedlam are said to have
been distinguished by the names of saints and patriarchs, as _Abraham_.
Some find the origin of the name in an allusion to the parable of the
beggar Lazarus, who found his rest in _Abraham's_ bosom (Luke xvi.).]

ABRANCHIATE, a-brang'ki-[=a]t, _adj._ having no gills.--Also ABRAN'CHIAL.
[Gr. _a_, priv., and _brangchia_, gills.]

ABRASION, ab-r[=a]'zhun, _n._ the act of rubbing off.--_adj._ and _n._
ABR[=A]'SIVE. [See ABRADE.]

[Illustration]

ABRAXAS, a-braks'as, _n._ a mystic word, or an amulet, consisting of a gem
engraved therewith on some part of it, often bearing a mystical figure of
combined human and animal form, used as a charm. [Said to be coined by the
Egyptian Gnostic Basilides in 2d century to express 365 in Greek letters;
thus [Greek: abraxas] used as numerals = 1 + 2 + 100 + 1 + 60 + 1 + 200.
But Mr C. W. King finds its origin in Heb. _ha-b'r[=a]k[=a]h_, 'the
blessing,' or 'sacred name,' used as the title of a Gnostic deity
representing the 365 emanations of the Divine Pl[=e]r[=o]ma or fullness.]

ABRAY, a-br[=a]', ABRAYD, a-br[=a]d', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to start out of
sleep: to awake.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to arouse, startle.--The more correct
form is _abraid_. [Made up of pfx. _a-_, and _abrédan_. A.S. _breydan_, to
twist. See BRAID.]

ABREAST, a-brest', _adv._ with fronts in a line: side by side: (_naut._)
opposite to. [Prep. _a_, on, and BREAST.]

ABRICOCK. See APRICOT.

ABRIDGE, a-brij', _v.t._ to make brief or short: to shorten: to epitomise:
to curtail, as privileges or authority.--_ns._ ABRIDG'MENT, ABRIDGE'MENT,
contraction: shortening of time, labour or privileges: a compendium of a
larger work: an epitome or synopsis: (_law_) the leaving out of certain
portions Of a plaintiff's demand, the writ still holding good for the
remainder. [O. Fr. _abregier_ (Fr. _abréger_)--L. _abbrevi[=a]re_. See
ABBREVIATE.]

ABROACH, a-br[=o]ch', _adv._ broached: in a condition to let the liquor run
out: in a state to be diffused, afloat: astir. [Prep. _a_, and BROACH.]

ABROAD, a-brawd', _adv._ on the broad or open space: out of doors: public:
in another country. [Prep. _a_, and BROAD.]

ABROGATE, ab'ro-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to repeal (a law): to set aside.--_n._
ABROG[=A]'TION, act of repealing or setting aside.--_adj._ AB'ROGATIVE. [L.
_ab_, away, _rog[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to ask or propose a law.]

ABROOK, a-brook', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to brook, bear, or endure. [Pfx. _a-_,
and BROOK, _v._]

ABRUPT, ab-rupt', _adj._ the opposite of gradual, as if broken off: sudden:
unexpected: precipitous: (_of style_) passing from one thought to another
without transitions: (_of manners_) short, rude.--_n._ an abrupt
place.--_n._ ABRUP'TION, a sudden breaking off: violent separation:
(_Shak._) interruption, pause.--_adv._ ABRUPT'LY.--_n._ ABRUPT'NESS. [L.
_abruptus_--_ab_, off, _rump[)e]re_, _ruptum_, to break.]

ABSCESS, ab'ses, _n._ a collection of purulent matter within some tissue of
the body. [L. _abscessus_--_abs_, away, _ced[)e]re_, _cessum_, to go, to
retreat.]

ABSCIND, ab-sind', _v.t._ to cut off.--_n._ ABSCIS'SION, act of cutting
off, or state of being cut off: (_rhet._) a figure of speech in which the
words demanded by the sense are left unsaid, the speaker stopping short
suddenly. [L. _abscindo_; _ab_, off, _scindo_, to cut.]

ABSCISS, ab'sis, ABSCISSA, ab-sis'sa, _n._ the straight line cut off or
intercepted between the vertex of a curve and an ordinate, measured along
the principal axis:--_pl._ ABSCISS'ES, ABSCISS'Æ, ABSCISS'AS. [L.
_abscissus_, cut off, _pa.p._ of _abscind[)e]re_--_ab_, from,
_scind[)e]re_, to cut.]

ABSCOND, abs-kond', _v.i._ to hide, or quit the country, in order to escape
a legal process. [L. _abscond[)e]re_, _abs_, from or away, _cond[)e]re_, to
hide.]

ABSENT, abs'ent, _adj._ being away: not present: inattentive--_v.t._
(abs-ent') to keep one's self away.--_ns._ ABS'ENCE, the state of being
away or not present: want: inattention; ABSENTEE', one who is absent on any
occasion: one who makes a habit of living away from his estate or his
office; ABSENTEE'ISM, the practice of absenting one's self from duty or
station, esp. of a landowner living away from his estate.--_adv._
AB'SENTLY. [L. _absent-_, pr.p. of _absum_--_ab_, away from, _sum_, _esse_,
to be.]

ABSINTH, ABSINTHE, ab'sinth, _n._ spirit combined with extract of
wormwood.--_adjs._ ABSINTH'IAN, ABSINTH'IATED, impregnated with absinth.
[Fr.--L. _absinthium_, wormwood--Gr.]

ABSOLUTE, ab'sol-[=u]t, _adj._ free from limits or conditions: complete:
unlimited: free from mixture: considered without reference to other things:
unconditioned, unalterable: unrestricted by constitutional checks (said of
a government): (_gram._) not immediately dependent: (_phil._) existing in
and by itself without necessary relation to any other being: capable of
being conceived of as unconditioned. In the sense of being finished,
perfect, it may be considered as opposed to the Infinite; but, in the sense
of being freed from restriction or condition, it is evident the Infinite
itself must be absolute. Opposite schools differ on the question whether
the Absolute can be known under conditions of consciousness.--_adv._
AB'SOLUTELY, separately: unconditionally: positively: completely.--_ns._
AB'SOLUTENESS; ABSOL[=U]'TION, release from punishment: acquittal:
remission of sins declared officially by a priest, or the formula by which
such is expressed; AB'SOLUTISM, government where the ruler is without
restriction; AB'SOLUTIST, a supporter of absolute government.--_adjs._
ABSOL'UTORY, ABSOLV'ATORY.--THE ABSOLUTE, that which is absolute,
self-existent, uncaused. [L. _absolutus_, pa.p. of _absolv[)e]re_. See
ABSOLVE.]

ABSOLVE, ab-zolv', _v.t._ to loose or set free: to pardon: to acquit: to
discharge (with _from_).--_ns._ ABSOLV'ER, one who gives absolution or
acquits; ABSOLV'ITOR, a decision favourable to a defender.--_v.t._
ASSOIL'ZIE, in Scots law, to absolve the accused on the grounds that the
evidence disproves or does not establish the charge. [L. _ab_, from,
_solv[)e]re_, _solutum_, to loose. See SOLVE.]

ABSONANT, ab'so-nant, _adj._ discordant: absurd: unnatural (with _to_ or
_from_)--opp. to _Consonant_. [L. _ab_, from, _sonant-_, pr.p. of
_son[=a]re_, to sound.]

ABSORB, ab-sorb', _v.t._ to suck in: to swallow up: to engage wholly.--_n._
ABSORBABIL'ITY.--_adj._ ABSORB'ABLE, that may be absorbed.--_p.adj._
ABSORBED', swallowed up: entirely occupied.--_advs._ ABSORB'EDLY,
ABSORB'INGLY.--_adj._ ABSORB'ENT, imbibing: swallowing.--_n._ that which
absorbs.--_n._ ABSORP'TION, the act of absorbing: entire occupation of
mind.--_adj._ ABSORP'TIVE, having power to absorb.--_n._ ABSORPTIV'ITY.
[Fr.--L. _ab_, from, _sorb[=e]re_, _-sorptum_, to suck in.]

ABSTAIN, abs-t[=a]n', _v.i._ to hold or refrain from.--_ns._ ABSTAIN'ER,
specially one who does not take alcoholic drinks; ABSTEN'TION, a
refraining. [Fr. _abstenir_--L. _abs_, from, _ten[=e]re_, to hold. See
TENABLE.]

ABSTEMIOUS, abs-t[=e]m'i-us, _adj._ temperate: sparing in food, drink, or
enjoyments.--_adv._ ABSTEM'IOUSLY.--_n._ ABSTEM'IOUSNESS. [L.
_abstemius_--_abs_, from, _temetum_, strong wine.]

ABSTERSION, abs-ter'shun, _n._ act of cleansing or washing away
impurities.--_v.t._ ABSTERGE', to cleanse, purge.--_adjs._ ABSTER'GENT,
serving to cleanse; ABSTER'SIVE, having the quality of cleansing:
purgative. [L. _absterg[=e]re_, _-tersum_, to wipe away.]

ABSTINENT, abs'tin-ent, _adj._ abstaining from: temperate.--_n._
ABS'TINENCE, an abstaining or refraining, especially from some indulgence
(with _from_)--also ABS'TINENCY.--_adv._ ABS'TINENTLY. [See ABSTAIN.]

ABSTRACT, abs-trakt', _v.t._ to draw away: to separate: to purloin.--_adj._
ABSTRACT'ED, drawn off (with _from_): removed: absent in mind.--_adv._
ABSTRACT'EDLY.--_ns._ ABSTRACT'EDNESS; ABSTRAC'TION, act of abstracting:
state of being abstracted: absence of mind: the operation of the mind by
which certain qualities or attributes of an object are considered apart
from the rest: a purloining.--_adj._ ABSTRACT'IVE, having the power of
abstracting.--_n._ anything abstractive: an abstract.--_adv._
ABS'TRACTLY.--_n._ ABS'TRACTNESS. [L. _abs_, away from, _trah[)e]re_,
_tractum_, to draw. See TRACE.]

ABSTRACT, abs'trakt, _adj._ general, as opposed to particular or individual
(the opposite of _abstract_ is _concrete_--a red colour is an abstract
notion, a red rose is a concrete notion; an abstract noun is the name of a
quality apart from the thing, as redness).--_n._ summary: abridgment:
essence. [L. _abstractus_, as if a quality common to a number of things
were drawn away from the things and considered by itself.]

ABSTRUSE, abs-tr[=oo]s', _adj._ hidden: remote from apprehension: difficult
to be understood.--_adv._ ABSTRUSE'LY.--_ns._ ABSTRUSE'NESS; ABSTRUS'ITY
(_Sir T. Browne_). [L. _abstrusus_, thrust away (from
observation)--_trud[)e]re_, _trusum_, to thrust.]

ABSURD, ab-surd', _adj._ obviously unreasonable or false:
ridiculous.--_ns._ ABSURD'ITY, ABSURD'NESS, the quality of being absurd:
anything absurd.--_adv._ ABSURD'LY. [L. _absurdus_--_ab_, from, _surdus_,
harsh-sounding, deaf.]

ABUNDANCE, ab-und'ans, _n._ ample sufficiency: great plenty.--_adj._
ABUND'ANT, plentiful.--_adv._ ABUND'ANTLY. [See ABOUND.]

ABUSE, ab-[=u]z', _v.t._ to use wrongly: to pervert: to revile: to
violate.--_ns._ ABUSE (ab-[=u]s'), ill use: misapplication: reproach:
vituperation; AB[=U]'SION (_Spens._), abuse: deception: reproach.--_adj._
ABUS'IVE, containing or practising abuse: full of abuses:
vituperative.--_adv._ ABUS'IVELY.--_n._ ABUS'IVENESS. [L. _ab_, away (from
what is right), _uti_, _usus_, to use.]

ABUT, a-but', _v.i._ to end: to border (on):--_pr.p._ abut'ting; _pa.p._
abut'ted.--_ns._ ABUT'MENT, that which abuts: (_archit._) what a limb of an
arch ends or rests on; ABUT'TAL, an abutment: (_pl._) the
boundaries.--_p.adj._ ABUT'TING, facing each other: front to front. [Fr.
_abouter_, lit. to join end to end (_à_, to, _bout_, end). See BUTT, the
end.]

ABY, ABYE, a-b[=i], _v.t._ or _v.i._ (_arch._) to pay the penalty: to
suffer for: to give satisfaction.--ABY occurs in Spens. with sense of
'abide.' [Pfx. _a-_, and A.S. _bycgan_. See BUY.]

ABYSM, a-bizm', _n._ a form of ABYSS.--_adj._ ABYS'MAL, bottomless:
unending.--_adv._ ABYSM'ALLY. [O. Fr. _abisme_, from Lat. _abyssimus_,
superl. of _abyssus_, bottomless.]

ABYSS, a-bis', _n._ a bottomless gulf: a deep mass of water.--_adj._
ABYSS'AL. [Gr. _abyssos_, bottomless--_a_, without, _byssos_, bottom.]

ACACIA, a-k[=a]'shi-a, _n._ a genus of thorny leguminous plants with
pinnate leaves. [L.--Gr. _akakia_--_ak[=e]_, a sharp point.]

ACADEME, ak-a-d[=e]m', _n._ (_obs._) an academy.

ACADEMIC, ak-ad-em'ik, _n._ a Platonic philosopher: a student in a college.
[See ACADEMY.]

ACADEMY, ak-ad'em-i, _n._ (_orig._) the school of Plato: a higher school: a
society for the promotion of science or art.--_adjs._ ACADEM'IC, -AL, of an
academy: theoretical as opposed to practical.--_adv._
ACADEM'ICALLY.--_n.pl._ ACADEM'ICALS, the articles of dress worn by members
of an academy or college.--_ns._ ACADEMIC'IAN, ACAD'EMIST, a member of an
academy, or, specially, of the French Academy, or the Royal Academy in
London. [Gr. _Akad[=e]mia_, the name of the garden near Athens where Plato
taught.]

ACADIAN, a-k[=a]'di-an, _adj._ of or native to Nova Scotia, Acadia being
the name given to the country by the first French settlers in 1604.

ACAJOU, ak'a-j[=oo], _n._ the gum or resin of a kind of red mahogany.
[Origin doubtful. See CASHEW.]

ACALEPHA, ak-a-l[=e]'fa, _n._ a class of Radiate marine animals, consisting
of soft gelatinous substance. The name was first applied to the Jelly-fish
tribe, but later was made to include the true _Medusæ_ or jelly-fishes, and
others.--Other forms are ACALEPH and ACALEPHAN. [Gr. _akal[=e]ph[=e]_, a
nettle.]

ACANTHOPTERYGIAN, ak-an-thop-t[.e]r-ij'i-an, _adj._ having spiny fins. [Gr.
_akantha_, thorn, _pteryx_, _pterygos_, a wing, a fin.]

[Illustration]

ACANTHUS, a-kan'thus, _n._ a prickly plant, called bear's breech or
brank-ursine: (_archit._) an ornament resembling its leaves used in the
capitals of the Corinthian and Composite orders, &c.--also
ACAN'THA.--_adjs._ ACAN'THINE, ACANTH[=A]'CEOUS. [L.--Gr.
_akanthos_--_ak[=e]_, a point, _anthos_, a flower.]

ACARPOUS, a-kar'pus, _adj._ (_bot._) without, or not producing, fruit. [Gr.
_a_, neg., and _karpos_, fruit.]

ACARUS, ak'ar-us, _n._ a genus of minute insects, of the class Arachnides,
embracing the mites and ticks:--_pl._ AC'AR[=I]. [L.; Gr. _akares_, minute,
too small to cut--_a_, neg., _keirein_, to cut short.]

ACATALECTIC, a-kat-a-lek'tik, _adj._ having the complete number of
syllables as a verse: without defect.--_n._ an acatalectic verse. [L.--Gr.
_a_, not, and CATALECTIC.]

ACATALEPSY, a-kat-a-lep'si, _n._ incomprehensibility, a term of the sceptic
school of Carneades, who thought nothing could be known to certainty by
man.--_adj._ ACATALEP'TIC. [Gr. _akatal[=e]psia_--_a_, neg., _kata_,
thoroughly, _l[=e]psis_, a seizing--_lambanein_, to take hold.]

ACATER, a-k[=a]t'[.e]r, _n._ (_obs._) a caterer.--_n.pl._ ACATES',
provisions: food. [O. Fr. _acateor_, _achatour_ (Fr. _acheteur_)--Low L.
_accapt[=a]t[=o]r-em_, _accaptare_, to acquire--L. _ad-_, to, and
_capt[=a]re_, to seize. See CATES.]

ACAULESCENT, a-kaw-les'ent, _adj._ without a stalk: (_bot._) having no stem
above ground, or only a very short one.--Also ACAU'LOUS. [_a_, neg., L.
_caulis_, a stalk, formed on pattern of ARBORESCENT.]

ACCABLE, ak-k[=a]'bl, _v.t._ (_obs._) to crush, to encumber. [Fr.
_accabler_, to crush.]

ACCADIAN, a-k[=a]'di-an, _adj._ of or belonging to Accad, an ancient city
mentioned in Gen. x. 10: the language preserved in the earliest form of
cuneiform writing.

ACCEDE, ak-s[=e]d', _v.i._ to come to, or arrive at, a place or condition:
to join one's self, hence to agree or assent (with _to_).--_ns._ ACCED'ER;
ACCED'ING. [L. _acced[)e]re_, _accessum_, to go near to--_ad_, to,
_ced[)e]re_, to go. See CEDE.]

ACCELERATE, ak-sel'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to increase the speed of: to hasten
the progress of.--_n._ ACCELER[=A]'TION, the act of hastening: increase of
speed.--_adj._ ACCEL'ERATIVE, quickening.--_n._ ACCEL'ERATOR, one who or
that which accelerates: a light van to take mails between a post-office and
a railway station.--_adj._ ACCEL'ERATORY. [L. _acceler[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _celer_, swift. See CELERITY.]

ACCEND, ak-send', _v.i._ (_obs._) to kindle.--_ns._ ACCENDIBIL'ITY,
ACCEN'SION.--_adjs._ ACCEND'IBLE, ACCEND'ING.

ACCENT, ak'sent, _n._ modulation of the voice: stress on a syllable or
word: a mark used to direct this stress: any mode of utterance peculiar to
a country, a province, or an individual: (_poet._) a significant word, or
words generally: (_pl._) speech, language.--_v.t._ ACCENT', to express or
note the accent.--_adj._ ACCENT'UAL, relating to accent.--_n._
ACCENTUAL'ITY.--_adv._ ACCENT'UALLY.--_v.t._ ACCENT'UATE, to mark or
pronounce with accent: to make prominent.--_n._ ACCENTU[=A]'TION, the act
of marking or of pronouncing accents. [Fr.--L. _accentus_, a tone or
note--_ad_, to, _can[)e]re_, to sing.]

ACCENTOR, ak-sent'or, _n._ the so-called 'hedge-sparrow' (q.v.).

ACCEPT, ak-sept', _v.t._ to receive: to agree to: to promise to pay: (_B._)
to receive with favour.--_adj._ ACCEPTABLE (ak-sept'a-bl, or ak'sept-a-bl),
to be accepted: pleasing: agreeable.--_ns._ ACCEPT'ABLENESS,
ACCEPTABIL'ITY, quality of being acceptable.--_adv._ ACCEPT'ABLY.--_ns._
ACCEPT'ANCE, a favourable reception: an agreeing to terms: an accepted
bill; ACCEPT'ANCY, willingness to receive; ACCEPT'ANT, one who
accepts--also _adj._; ACCEPT[=A]'TION, a kind reception: the received
meaning of a word; ACCEPT'ER, ACCEPT'OR, one who accepts. [L.
_accept[=a]re_--_accip[)e]re_, _acceptum_--_ad_, to, _cap[)e]re_, to take.]

ACCEPTILATION, ak-sept-il-[=a]'shun, _n._ (_Roman_ and _Scots law_) the
remission of a debt through an acquittance by the creditor testifying to
the receipt of money which never has been paid--a kind of legal fiction for
a free remission: (_theol._) the doctrine that the satisfaction rendered by
Christ was not in itself really a true or full equivalent, but was merely
accepted by God, through his gracious good-will, as sufficient--laid down
by Duns Scotus, and maintained by the Arminians. [L. _acceptilatio_.]

ACCESS, ak'ses, or ak-ses', _n._ liberty to come to, approach:
increase.--_n._ ACCESSIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ ACCESS'IBLE, that may be
approached.--_adv._ ACCESS'IBLY. [See ACCEDE.]

ACCESSARY, ak-ses'ar-i, or ak'ses-ar-i. Same as ACCESSORY. _Accessary_ is
now the usual spelling of both the adjective and the noun in their legal
sense.

ACCESSION, ak-sesh'un, _n._ a coming to: increase.--A DEED OF ACCESSION
(_Scots law_), a deed by which the creditors of a bankrupt approve of a
trust settlement executed by the debtor for the general behoof, and consent
to the arrangement proposed.

ACCESSORY, ak'ses-sor-i, _adj._ additional: contributing to: aiding:
(_law_) participating in a crime, as in reset of theft, and the like.--_n._
anything additional: one who aids or gives countenance to a crime.--_adj._
ACCESS[=O]R'IAL, relating to an accessory.--_adv._ AC'CESSORILY, in the
manner of an accessory: by subordinate means.

ACCIDENCE, ak'sid-ens, _n._ the part of grammar treating of the inflections
of words (because these changes are 'accidentals' of words and not
'essentials').

ACCIDENT, ak'sid-ent, _n._ that which happens: an unforeseen or unexpected
event: chance: an unessential quality or property.--_adj._ ACCIDENT'AL,
happening by chance: not essential.--_n._ anything not essential.--_ns._
ACCIDENT'ALISM, ACCIDENTAL'ITY.--_adv._ ACCIDENT'ALLY.--THE CHAPTER OF
ACCIDENTS, the unforeseen course of events. [L. _accid[)e]re_, to
happen--_ad_, to, _cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

ACCITE, ak-s[=i]t', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to cite or call, to summon:--_pr.p._
acc[=i]t'ing; _pa.p._ acc[=i]t'ed. [L. _acc[=i]re_, _-citum_--_ad_, to,
_ci[=e]re_, _citum_, to call.]

ACCLAMATION, ak-klam-[=a]'shun, _n._ a shout of applause--(_poet._)
ACCLAIM'.--_v.t._ ACCLAIM', to declare by acclamation.--_adj._
ACCLAM'ATORY, expressing acclamation. [L. _acclam[=a]re_--_ad_, to,
_clam[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to shout. See CLAIM.]

ACCLIMATISE, ak-kl[=i]m'at-[=i]z, _v.t._ to inure to a foreign
climate--also ACCLIM'ATE.--_n._ ACCLIMATIS[=A]'TION, the act of
acclimatising: the state of being acclimatised--also ACCLIM[=A]'TION,
ACCLIMAT[=A]'TION, the former anomalous, the second used in French. [Fr.
_acclimater_, from _à_ and _climat_. See CLIMATE.]

ACCLIMATURE, ak-kl[=i]'ma-t[=u]r, _n._ Same as ACCLIMATISATION.

ACCLIVITY, ak-kliv'i-ti, _n._ a slope upwards--opp. to _Declivity_, a slope
downwards.--_adj._ ACCL[=I]'VOUS, rising as an acclivity--also
ACCLIV'ITOUS. [L. _ad_, to, _clivus_, a slope.]

ACCLOY, ak-kloi', _v.t._ (_obs._) to cloy or choke: to fill to satiety: to
encumber. [See CLOY.]

ACCOAST, ak-k[=o]st', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to fly near the earth. [See
ACCOST.]

ACCOIL, ak-koil', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to gather together. [Through Fr.--L.
_ad_, to, _collig[)e]ere_, to collect. See COIL.]

ACCOLADE, ak-ol-[=a]d', _n._ a ceremony used in conferring knighthood,
formerly an embrace, a kiss, now a slap on the shoulders with the flat of a
sword. [Fr.--L. _ad_, to, _collum_, neck.]

ACCOMMODATE, ak-kom'mod-[=a]t, _v.t._ to adapt: to make suitable: to
adjust: to harmonise or force into consistency (_to_): to furnish or supply
(_with_): to provide entertainment for.--_p.adj._ ACCOM'MODATING, affording
accommodation: obliging: pliable: easily corrupted.--_n._
ACCOMMOD[=A]'TION, convenience: fitness: adjustment: obligingness: an
arrangement or compromise: (_theol._) an adaptation or method of
interpretation which explains the special form in which the revelation is
presented as unessential to its contents, or rather as often adopted by way
of compromise with human ignorance or weakness: a loan of money.--_adj._
ACCOM'MODATIVE, furnishing accommodation: obliging.--_ns._
ACCOM'MODATIVENESS; ACCOM'MODATOR.--ACCOMMODATION BILL, a bill drawn,
accepted, or endorsed by one or more persons as security for a sum advanced
to another by a third party, as a banker; ACCOMMODATION LADDER, a stairway
at the outside of a ship's gangway to facilitate access to boats. [L. _ad_,
to, _commodus_, fitting. See COMMODIOUS.]

ACCOMPANABLE, ak-kum'pan-a-bl, _adj._ (_obs._) sociable. [From ACCOMPANY.]

ACCOMPANY, ak-kum'pan-i, _v.t._ to keep company with: to attend: to support
a singer by singing or playing on any instrument an additional part
(_with_, of music; _on_, of the instrument).--_ns._ ACCOM'PANIER;
ACCOM'PANIMENT, that which accompanies: (_mus._) the assisting of a solo
part by other parts, which may consist of a whole orchestra, or a single
instrument, or even subservient vocal parts; ACCOM'PANIST, one who
accompanies a singer on an instrument to sustain his voice. [Fr.
_accompagner_. See COMPANY.]

ACCOMPLICE, ak-kom'plis, _n._ an associate, esp. in crime, in modern use
(with _of_ and _with_ before a person, and _in_ or _of_ before the crime).
[L. _ad_, to, _complex_, _-icis_, joined.]

ACCOMPLISH, ak-kom'plish, _v.t._ to complete: to bring about: to effect: to
fulfil: to equip.--_adjs._ ACCOM'PLISHABLE, that may be accomplished;
ACCOM'PLISHED, complete in acquirements, especially graceful acquirements:
polished.--_n._ ACCOM'PLISHMENT, completion: ornamental acquirement. [Fr.
_acomplir_--L. _ad_, to, _compl[=e]re_, to fill up. See COMPLETE.]

ACCOMPT, ak-komt', _n._ an almost obsolete form of ACCOUNT; ACCOMPT'ABLE,
of ACCOUNTABLE; ACCOMPT'ANT, of ACCOUNTANT.

ACCORAGE. Same as ACCOURAGE.

ACCORD, ak-kord', _v.i._ to agree: to be in correspondence
(_with_).--_v.t._ to cause to agree: to reconcile: to grant (_to_, of a
person).--_n._ agreement: harmony.--_n._ ACCORD'ANCE, agreement:
conformity--also ACCORD'ANCY.--_adj._ ACCORD'ANT, agreeing:
corresponding.--_adv._ ACCORD'ANTLY.--_p.adj._ ACCORD'ING, in accordance:
agreeing: harmonious.--_adv._ ACCORD'INGLY, agreeably: suitably: in
agreement (with what precedes).--ACCORDING AS, in proportion as, or
agreeably as; ACCORDING TO, in accordance with, or agreeably to.--OF ONE'S
OWN ACCORD, of one's own spontaneous motion. [O. Fr. _acorder_--L. _ad_,
to, _cor_, _cordis_, the heart.]

ACCORDION, ak-kor'di-on, _n._ a portable musical instrument consisting of a
hand-bellows, with keyboard on one side, the keys resting on free metal
reeds so arranged that each sounds two notes, one in expanding, the other
in contracting the bellows. [From ACCORD.]

ACCOST, ak-kost', _v.t._ to speak first to: to address.--_ns._ ACCOST',
ACCOST'ING (_obs._), address: greeting.--_adj._ ACCOST'ABLE, easy of
access. [O. Fr. _acoster_--Low L. _accost[=a]re_, to be side by side--L.
_ad_, to, _costa_, a side.]

ACCOUCHEMENT, ak-k[=oo]sh'mong, _n._ delivery in childbed. [Fr.
_accoucher_. See COUCH.]

ACCOUCHEUR, ak-k[=oo]-sh[.e]r', _n._ a man who assists women in
child-birth: a medical practitioner with this speciality:--_fem._
ACCOUCHEUSE (ak-k[=oo]-sh[.e]z'). [Fr.]

ACCOUNT, ak-kownt', _v.t._ to reckon: to judge, value.--_v.i._ (with _for_)
to give a reason: to give an account of money held in trust.--_n._ a
counting: statement: value: sake: a reckoning as to money, as in phrases
like, 'to render an account,' 'to settle an account,' 'to square accounts'
with any one, &c.--_adj._ ACCOUNT'ABLE, liable to account, responsible
(_for_, of the thing; _to_, of the person).--_ns._ ACCOUNT'ABLENESS,
ACCOUNTABIL'ITY, liability to give account, responsibility to fulfil
obligations.--_adv._ ACCOUNT'ABLY.--_ns._ ACCOUNT'ANCY, the office or work
of an accountant; ACCOUNT'ANT, one who keeps, or is skilled in, accounts;
ACCOUNT'ANTSHIP, the employment of an accountant; ACCOUNT'-BOOK, a book in
which accounts are kept.--ACCOUNT CURRENT, or open account, a course of
business dealings still going on between two persons, or a person and a
bank.--FOR ACCOUNT OF, on behalf of; FOR THE ACCOUNT, for settlement on the
regular fortnightly or monthly settling-day, instead of for cash (of sales
on the Stock Exchange).--IN ACCOUNT WITH, in business relations requiring
the keeping of an account with some one.--ON or TO ACCOUNT, an instalment
or interim payment.--TO MAKE ACCOUNT OF, to set value upon; TO TAKE INTO
ACCOUNT, to take into consideration; TO TAKE NO ACCOUNT OF, to overlook.
[O. Fr. _acconter_--L. _ad_, to, _comput[=a]re_, to reckon. See COMPUTE,
COUNT.]

ACCOUPLE, ak-kup'l, _v.t._ (_obs._) to couple or link together. [O. Fr.
_acopler_--_à_, to, _cople_. See COUPLE.]

ACCOURAGE, ak-kur'[=a]j, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to encourage. [O. Fr.
_acorager_--_à_ (L. _ad_), and _corage_ (Fr. _courage_). See COURAGE.]

ACCOURT, ak-k[=o]rt', _v.t._ (_Spens._). Same as COURT.

ACCOUTRE, ak-k[=oo]'t[.e]r, _v.t._ to dress or equip (esp. a
warrior):--_pr.p._ accou'tring; _pa.p._ accou'tred.--_n.pl._
ACCOU'TREMENTS, dress: military equipments--(_Spens._) ACCOU'STREMENTS.
[Fr. _accoutrer_, earlier _accoustrer_--of doubtful origin, prob. conn.
with O. Fr. _coustre_, _coutre_, a sacristan who had charge of sacred
vestments--Low L. _custor_--L. _custos_, a keeper.]

ACCOY, ak-koi', _v.t._ (_obs._) to still or quieten: to soothe: to subdue.
[O. Fr. _acoyer_--_à_, to, and _coi_, quiet--L. _quiet-um_. See COY.]

ACCREDIT, ak-kred'it, _v.t._ to give credit, countenance, authority, or
honour to: to furnish with credentials (with _to_, _at_): to vouch for
anything belonging to some one--to ascribe or attribute it to him
(_with_).--_v.t._ ACCRED'ITATE (_obs._).--_n._ ACCREDIT[=A]'TION, fact of
being accredited.--The _pa.p._ ACCRED'ITED, as _adj._, recognised. [Fr.
_accréditer_--_à_, to, _crédit_, credit. See CREDIT.]

ACCRESCENT, ak-kres'ent, _adj._ growing: ever-increasing.--_ns._
ACCRES'CENCE, gradual growth or increase; ACCR[=E]'TION, the process of
growing continuously: the growing together of parts externally, or
continuous coherence: that which has grown in such a way, any extraneous
addition.--_adj._ ACCR[=E]'TIVE. [L. _ad_, in addition, _cresc[)e]re_, to
grow.]

ACCREW, ak-kr[=oo]' (_Spens._). Same as ACCRUE.

ACCRUE, ak-kr[=oo]', _v.i._ to spring or grow as a natural result (with
_from_): to fall to any one by way of advantage (with _unto_, _to_). [O.
Fr. _acrewe_, what grows up in a wood to the profit of the owner;
_acreistre_--L. _accresc[)e]re_.]

ACCUBATION, ak-ku-b[=a]'shun, _n._ a lying or reclining on a couch. [L.
_ad_, to, and _cubare_, to lie down.]

ACCUMBENT, ak-kumb'ent, _adj._ lying down or reclining on a couch. [L.
_ad_, to, _cumb[)e]re_, to lie.]

ACCUMULATE, ak-k[=u]m'[=u]l-[=a]t, _v.t._ to heap or pile up: to amass: to
take degrees by accumulation, to take a higher degree at the same time with
a lower, or at a shorter interval than usual.--_v.i._ to increase greatly:
to go on increasing.--_n._ ACCUMUL[=A]'TION, a heaping up: a heap, mass, or
pile.--_adj._ ACCUM'ULATIVE, heaping up.--_n._ ACCUM'ULATOR, a thing or
person that accumulates, esp. an apparatus for storing electricity.
[L.--_ad_, to, _cumulus_, a heap.]

ACCURATE, ak'k[=u]r-[=a]t, _adj._ done with care: exact.--_n._ AC'CURACY,
correctness: exactness.--_adv._ AC'CURATELY.--_n._ AC'CURATENESS. [L.
_accuratus_, performed with care (of things)--_ad_, to, _cura_, care.]

ACCURSE, ak-kurs', _v.t._ to curse: to devote to misery or
destruction.--_adj._ ACCURS'ED, subjected to a curse: doomed: worthy of a
curse: extremely wicked. [Pfx. _à-_, and A.S. _cursian_, to curse.]

ACCUSATIVE, ak-k[=u]z'a-tiv, _adj._ accusing.--_n._ (_gram._) the case
which expresses the direct object of transitive verbs (in English, the
objective)--primarily expressing destination or the goal of motion.--_adj._
ACCUS'ATIVAL. [Fr. _accusatif_--L. _accusativus_, 'of the nature of
accusation,' a translation of the Gr. _(pt[=o]sis) aitiatik[=e]_, (the
case) 'of accusing,' but also 'of or pertaining to what is caused or
effected' (_aitiaton_, effect, _aitia_, cause); hence, properly, the case
of the effect.]

ACCUSE, ak-k[=u]z', _v.t._ to bring a charge against: to blame (with _of_
before the thing charged, sometimes _for_).--_adj._ ACCUS'ABLE, that may be
accused.--_ns._ ACCUS'AL, accusation; ACCUS[=A]'TION, the act of accusing:
the charge brought against any one.--_adjs._ ACCUSAT[=O]'RIAL, of an
accuser; ACCUS'ATORY, containing accusation.--_n._ ACCUSE (_Shak._),
accusation.--_p.adj._ ACCUSED', charged with a crime: usually as a _n._,
the person accused.--_ns._ ACCUSE'MENT (_Spens._), a charge; ACCUS'ER, one
who accuses or brings a charge against another. [O. Fr. _acuser_--L.
_accus[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _causa_, cause.]

ACCUSTOM, ak-kus'tum, _v.t._ to make familiar by custom: to habituate (with
_to_).--_adj._ ACCUS'TOMARY.--_p.adj._ ACCUS'TOMED, usual: frequent:
habituated.--_n._ ACCUS'TOMEDNESS. [O. Fr. _acostumer_ (Fr.
_accoutumer_)--_à_, to, _costume_, _coustume_--L. _consuetudinem_. See
CUSTOM.]

ACE, [=a]s, _n._ the one at dice, also at cards, dominoes, &c.: a single
point, an atom. [Fr.--L. _as_, unity--_as_, Tarentine Doric form of Gr.
_heis_, one.]

ACELDAMA, a-sel'da-ma, _n._ a field of blood--the name given to the field
outside Jerusalem bought with the blood-money of Jesus. [Gr.--Aramaic.]

ACEPHALAN, a-sef'a-lan, _n._ (_zool._) one of the Acephala, a class of
molluscs, which present no traces of a head.--_adj._ ACEPH'ALOUS, without a
head. [Gr. _a_, neg., _kephal[=e]_, the head.]

ACERBITY, as-[.e]r'bi-ti, _n._ bitterness: sourness: harshness:
severity.--_adj._ ACERB'. [Fr.,--L. _acerbitat-em_--L. _acerbus_, harsh to
the taste--_acer_, sharp.]

ACERIC, a-ser'ik, _adj._ obtained from the maple. [From L. _acer_, a
maple-tree.]

ACETABULUM, as-[=e]-tab'[=u]-lum, _n._ (_anat._) the cavity which receives
the head of the thigh-bone: also a glandular substance found in the
placenta of some animals:--_pl._ ACETAB'ULA. [L., a cup-shaped vessel.]

ACETIC, as-et'ik, _adj._ of the nature of vinegar: sour--also AC[=E]'TOUS,
ACETOSE'.--_n._ ACES'CENCE, a tendency to sourness.--_adj._
ACES'CENT.--_n._ AC'ETATE, salt of acetic acid which is the sour principle
in vinegar. [L. _acetum_, vinegar--_ac-[=e]re_, to be sour.]

ACETIFY, as-et'i-f[=i], _v.t._ or _v.i._ to turn into vinegar.--_n._
ACETIFIC[=A]'TION. [L. _acetum_, vinegar, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ACETOPATHY, as-et-op'a-thi, _n._ the treating of ailments by the external
application of dilute acetic acid. [L. _ac[=e]tum_, acid, and Gr. _pathos_,
feeling.]

ACETYLENE, a-set'i-l[=e]n, _n._ a powerful illuminant gas (C_2H_2) produced
commercially from carbide of calcium by means of water.

ACHÆAN. See ACHEAN.

ACHARNEMENT, ä-shärn'ment (sometimes nasalised as in French), _n._ thirst
for blood, ferocity. [Fr. _acharner_, refl. _sacharner_, to thirst for
blood.]

ACHATES, a-k[=a]ts', _n.pl._ (_Spens._). Same as CATES.

ACHATES, ä-k[=a]'tes, _n._ trusty comrade, from the 'fidus Achates' of
Virgil's _Æneid_--the constant companion of Æneas in his wanderings after
the fall of Troy.

ACHE, [=a]k, _n._ a continued pain.--_v.i._ to be in continued
pain:--_pr.p._ [=a]ch'ing; _pa.p._ [=a]ched.--_n._ ACH'ING, continued pain
or distress. [The verb is properly _ake_, the noun _ache_, as in _speak_
and _speech_. The A.S. noun _æce_ is from the verb _ac-an_, to ache.]

ACHENIUM, a-k[=e]'ni-um, _n._ (_bot._) a small hard one-seeded fruit, which
does not open when ripe, as in the buttercup.--Also ACHENE'. [From Gr. _a_,
neg., and _chainein_, to gape.]

ACHERON, ak'k[.e]r-on, _n._ death, hell--from the name of that river in the
infernal regions of classical mythology.--_adj._ ACHERON'TIC, deadly.

ACHIEVE, a-ch[=e]v', _v.t._ to bring to a head or end: to perform: to
accomplish: to carry out successfully: to gain, win.--_adj._ ACHIEV'ABLE,
that may be achieved.--_n._ ACHIEVE'MENT, a performance: an exploit: an
escutcheon or armorial shield granted in memory of some achievement,
applied especially to the escutcheon over the tomb of a dead person,
generally called a _hatchment_. [Fr. _achever_, from _à chief (venir)_--Low
L. _ad caput venire_, to come to a head. See CHIEF.]

ACHILLEAN, ak-il-l[=e]'an, _adj._ like Achilles, the great Greek hero in
the Trojan war, brave, swift of foot, unrelenting in wrath.--ACHILLES
TENDON, the attachment of the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles of the calf
of the leg to the heel-bone, so named from the infant Achilles's mother,
Thetis, having held him by the heel when she dipped him into the Styx to
make him invulnerable.

ACHITOPHEL, ä-hit'[=o]-fel, _n._ an able but unprincipled counsellor, from
the name of David's sage counsellor who treacherously abetted the rebellion
of Absalom. Dryden in his famous satire applied the name to
Shaftesbury.--Also AHITH'OPHEL.

ACHROMATIC, a-kr[=o]m-at'ik, _adj._ transmitting light without colour, of a
lens or telescope.--_adv._ ACHROMAT'ICALLY.--_n._ ACHROM'ATISM, the state
of being achromatic.--_v.t._ ACHROM'ATIZE, to render achromatic. [Gr. _a_,
neg., and _chr[=o]ma_, _chromatos_, colour.]

ACICULAR, as-ik'[=u]-lar, _adj._ needle-shaped; slender and
sharp-pointed.--Also ACIC'ULATE, ACIC'ULATED. [L. _acicula_, dim. of
_acus_, a needle.]

ACID, as'id, _adj._ sharp: sour.--_n._ a sour substance: (_chem._) one of a
class of substances, usually sour, which turn vegetable blues to red, and
combine with alkalies, metallic oxides, &c. to form salts.--_adj._
ACID'IFIABLE, capable of being converted into an acid.--_ns._
ACIDIFIC[=A]'TION; ACID'ITY, the quality of being acid or sour--also
AC'IDNESS.--_v.t._ ACID'ULATE, to make slightly acid. [L. _ac-[=e]re_, to
be sour--root _ak_, sharp.]

ACIDIFY, as-id'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to make acid: to convert into an
acid:--_pr.p._ acid'ifying; _pa.p._ acid'ified. [L. _acidus_, sour, and
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ACIDIMETER, as-id-im'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
strength of acids.--_n._ ACIDIM'ETRY, the act of such measurement. [ACID
and METER.]

ACIDULOUS, as-id'[=u]-lus, _adj._ slightly sour: subacid: containing
carbonic acid, as mineral waters: (_fig._) caustic, sharp. [L. _acidulus_,
dim. of _acidus_, sour. See ACID.]

ACIERAGE, [=a]'s[=e]-[.e]r-[=a]j, _n._ the covering of an engraved
copper-plate with a film of iron to ensure durability. [Fr. _acier_,
steel--L. _acies_, a sharp point, and _-age_.]

ACIFORM, as'i-form, _adj._ needle-shaped. [L. _acus_, a needle, and FORM,
from _forma_, shape.]

ACINIFORM, a-sin'i-form, _adj._ in clusters like grapes, or having the form
of grapes. [L. _acinus_, a grape.]

ACKNOW, ak-n[=o]', _v.t._ (_obs._) to know, to recognise.--_adj._ ACKNOWN
(_Shak._), known or acquainted. [A.S. _on_, in, on, _cnâwan_, to KNOW.]

ACKNOWLEDGE, ak-nol'ej, _v.t._ to own a knowledge of: to own as true: to
confess: to admit or give intimation of the receipt of.--_adj._
ACKNOW'LEDGEABLE.--_adv._ ACKNOW'LEDGEABLY.--_n._ ACKNOWLEDGMENT,
recognition: admission: confession: thanks: a receipt. [From the _v._
ACKNOW, with suffix _-ledge_.]

ACLINIC, ak-lin'ik, _adj._ without inclination, applied to the magnetic
equator, which cuts the terrestrial equator, inasmuch as on that line the
magnetic needle has no dip, but lies horizontal. [Gr. _aklin[=e]s_--_a_,
neg., _klin-ein_, to bend.]

ACME, ak'm[=e], _n._ the top or highest point: the culmination or
perfection in the career of anything: crisis, as of a disease.--ACME
SKATES, the name given to a kind of skates, formed of steel, fixed to the
boot by a mechanical device, permitting them to be quickly fixed on or
taken off. [Gr. _akm[=e]_--_ak[=e]_, a point.]

ACNE, ak'n[=e], _n._ a common skin disease, an inflammation of the
sebaceous follicles of the skin, often occurring on the nose. [A corr. of
Gr. _akm[=e]_, a point.]

ACOCK, a-kok', _adv._ in a cocked manner: defiantly.--A COCK-BILL
(_naut._), having the ends pointing upward, as of an anchor hanging by its
ring at the cat-head, in a position for dropping; or of the yards when
topped up by one lift to an angle with the deck--the symbol of mourning.
[Prep. _a_, and COCK.]

ACOEMETI, a-sem'[=e]-t[=i], _n.pl._ a congregation of monks founded in 460
near Constantinople, who by alternating choirs kept divine service going on
day and night without intermission in their monastery. [Gr. _akoimetoi_,
sleepless, _a_, neg., and _koimaein_, to put to sleep.]

ACOLD, a-k[=o]ld', _adj._ (_arch._) cold. [A.S. _acóled_, pa.p. of
_acólian_; pfx. _a-_, intens., and _cólian_, to COOL.]

ACOLYTE, ak'o-l[=i]t, ACOLYTH, ak'o-lith, _n._ an inferior church officer:
an attendant or assistant: (_R. C. Church_) one ordained to the fourth of
the minor orders, next to the sub-deacon. [Gr. _akolouthos_, an attendant.]

ACONITE, ak'o-n[=i]t, _n._ the plant wolf's-bane or monk's-hood:
poison.--_adj._ ACONIT'IC.--_n._ ACON'ITINE, the essential principle of
aconite. [L. _aconitum_--Gr. _akoniton_.]

ACOP, a-kop', _adv._ (_obs._) on the top or head: on high. [Prep. _a_, and
A.S. _cop_, _copp_, summit.]

ACORN, [=a]'korn, _n._ the seed or fruit of the oak.--_adj._
A'CORNED.--_n._ A'CORN-SHELL, a name for the Bal[)a]nus (L., acorn), a
genus of Cirripedes in the class Crustacea. [A.S. _æcern_, prob. from
_æcer_, field, hence meaning 'the fruit of the unenclosed land.' The modern
form is due to confusion with _oak_ (A.S. _ác_) and _corn_.]

ACOSMISM, a-koz'mizm, _n._ refusal to believe in the existence of an
eternal world. [Gr., _a_, neg., and _kosmos_, the world.]

ACOTYLEDON, a-kot-i-l[=e]'dun, _n._ a plant without distinct cotyledons or
seed-lobes.--_adj._ ACOTYL[=E]'DONOUS. [Gr. _a_, neg., and
_kotyl[=e]d[=o]n_. See COTYLEDON.]

ACOUSTIC, a-kowst'ik, _adj._ pertaining to the sense of hearing or to the
theory of sounds: used in hearing, auditory.--_n._ ACOUST'ICS, the science
of sound. [Fr.--Gr. _akoustikos_--_akouein_, to hear.]

ACOY. Same as ACCOY.

ACQUAINT, ak-kw[=a]nt', _v.t._ to make or let one to know: to inform a
person of a thing (_with_): to inform (with personal object only).--_ns._
ACQUAINT'ANCE, familiar knowledge: a person whom we know;
ACQUAINT'ANCESHIP, familiar knowledge.--_p.adj._ ACQUAINT'ED (_with_),
personally known: having personal knowledge of. [O. Fr. _acointer_--Low L.
_accognit[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _cognitus_, known.]

ACQUEST, ak-kwest', _n._ an acquisition or thing acquired. [O. Fr.--L.
_acquisitus_, _acquir[)e]re_. See ACQUIRE.]

ACQUIESCE, ak-kwi-es', _v.i._ to rest satisfied or without making
opposition: to assent (with _in_).--_n._ ACQUIES'CENCE, quiet assent or
submission.--_adj._ ACQUIES'CENT, resting satisfied: easy:
submissive.--_advs._ ACQUIES'CENTLY, ACQUIES'CINGLY. [L.
_acquiesc[)e]re_--_ad_, and _quies_, rest.]

ACQUIRE, ak-kw[=i]r', _v.t._ to gain: to attain to.--_n._
ACQUIRABIL'ITY.--_adj._ ACQUIR'ABLE, that may be acquired.--_ns._
ACQUIRE'MENT, something learned or got by effort, rather than a gift of
nature; ACQUISI'TION, the act of acquiring: that which is acquired.--_adj._
ACQUIS'ITIVE, desirous to acquire.--_n._ ACQUIS'ITIVENESS, propensity to
acquire--one of the phrenologists' so-called faculties, with its special
organ. [O. Fr. _aquerre_--L. _acquir[)e]re_, _-quisitum_--_ad_, to, and
_quær[)e]re_, to seek.]

ACQUIST, ak-kwist', _n._ (_Milton_) a form of ACQUEST.

ACQUIT, ak-kwit', _v.t._ to free: to release: to settle, as a debt: to
behave or conduct (one's self): to declare innocent (with _of_ before the
thing of which acquitted):--_pr.p._ acquit'ting; _pa.p._ acquit'ted.--_ns._
ACQUIT'TAL, a judicial discharge from an accusation; ACQUIT'TANCE, a
discharge from an obligation or debt: a receipt in evidence of such a
discharge.--_v.t._ (_Shak._), to acquit, clear. [O. Fr. _acquiter_--L.
_ad_, to, _quiet[=a]re_, to give rest. See QUIT.]

ACRE, [=a]'k[.e]r, _n._ a measure of land containing 4840 sq. yards. The
Scotch acre contains 6150.4 sq. yards (48 Scotch--61 imperial acres): the
Irish, 7840 sq. yards (50 Irish--81 imperial acres): (_pl._) for lands,
estates generally: (_fig._) large quantities of anything.--_n._ A'CREAGE,
the number of acres in a piece of land.--_adj._ A'CRED, possessing acres or
land. [A.S. _æcer_; Ger. _acker_, L. _ager_, Gr. _agros_, Sans. _ajras_, a
plain.]

ACRID, ak'rid, _adj._ biting to the taste: pungent: bitter.--_ns._
ACRID'ITY, AC'RIDNESS, quality of being acrid: a sharp, bitter taste. [L.
_acer_, _acris_, sharp--root _ak_, sharp.]

ACRIMONY, ak'ri-mun-i, _n._ bitterness of feeling or language.--_adj._
ACRIM[=O]'NIOUS, sharp, bitter.--_n._ ACRIM[=O]'NIOUSNESS, the state or
quality of being acrimonious: severity. [L. _acrimonia_--_acer_, sharp.]

ACRITOCHROMACY, a-krit-o-kr[=o]'ma-si, _n._ inability to distinguish
between colours: colour-blindness. [From Gr. _akritos_, undistinguishable
(--_a_, neg., and _krinein_, to separate), and _chr[=o]ma_, _-atos_,
colour.]

ACRITUDE, ak'ri-t[=u]d, _n._ the quality of being acrid: a sharp bitter
taste: bitterness of temper or language. [L. _acritudo_--_acer_, sharp.]

ACROAMATIC, -AL, ak-ro-a-mat'ik, -al, _adj._ oral, esoteric,
secret--applied to the lectures of Aristotle delivered to a select circle
of students as opposed to his more popular lectures. [Gr.
_akroamatikos_--_akroasthai_, to hear.]

ACROBAT, ak'ro-bat, _n._ a rope-dancer: a tumbler: a vaulter.--_adj._
ACROBAT'IC.--_n._ ACROBAT'ISM, the art of the acrobat. [Gr. _akrobatos_,
walking on tiptoe; _akros_, point, _batos_--_bainein_, to go.]

ACROGEN, ak'ro-jen, _n._ a plant that grows at the top chiefly, as a
tree-fern.--_adj._ ACROG'ENOUS. [Gr. _akros_, top, _gen[=e]s_, born.]

ACROLITH, ak'ro-lith, _n._ a statue of the earlier Greek artists having the
trunk made of wood and the extremities of stone. [Gr.
_akrolithos_--_akros_, extreme, and _lithos_, stone.]

ACRONYCAL, a-kron'ik-al, _adj._ midnight, applied to stars that rise at
sunset and set at sunrise, or opposite to the sun.--_adv._ ACRON'YCALLY.
[Gr. _akros_, summit, middle (of time), and _nyx_, _nyktos_, night.]

ACROPOLIS, a-kro'pol-is, _n._ a citadel, esp. that of Athens. [Gr.
_akropolis_--_akros_, the highest, _polis_, a city.]

ACROSPIRE, ak'ro-sp[=i]r, _n._ (_bot._) the first leaf that appears when
corn sprouts. [Gr. _akros_, summit, end, _speira_, anything twisted round.]

ACROSS, a-kros', _prep._ or _adv._ crosswise: from side to side. [Prep.
_a_, and CROSS.]

ACROSTIC, a-kr[=o]'stik, _n._ a poem of which, if the first or the last
letter of each line be taken in succession, they will spell a name or a
sentence.--_adj._ ACR[=O]'STICAL.--_adv._ ACR[=O]'STICALLY.--_n._
ACR[=O]'STICISM, method of acrostics. [Gr. _akros_, extreme, and _stichos_,
a line.]

ACT, akt, _v.i._ to exert force or influence: to produce an effect: to
behave one's self: to feign.--_v.t._ to perform: to imitate or play the
part of.--_n._ something done or doing: an exploit: the very process of
doing something: a law or decision of a prince or legislative body: an
instrument in writing for verification: (_theol._) something done once for
all, in opposition to a work: a distinct section of a play: in
universities, a public disputation or lecture maintained by a candidate for
a degree.--_n._ ACT'ING, action: act of performing an assumed or a dramatic
part: feigning.--_adj._ performing some duty temporarily, or for
another.--_n._ ACT'OR, one who acts: a stage-player:--_fem._ ACT'RESS.--ACT
OF GOD, a result of natural forces, unexpected and not preventable by human
foresight.--IN ACT TO, on the very point of doing something.--TO ACT ON, to
act in accordance with; TO ACT UP TO, to come up in practice to some
expected standard: to fulfil. [L. _ag[)e]re_, _actum_; Gr. _agein_, to put
in motion; Sans. _aj_, to drive.]

ACTA, ak'ta, _n.pl._ proceedings in a court civil or ecclesiastical, or the
minutes of such.--ACTA MARTYRUM, the early accounts of the martyrs; ACTA
SANCTORUM, a general name for collections of accounts of saints and
martyrs, especially of the great collection of the Bollandists, begun in
1643, interrupted in 1794 at the fifty-third vol. (Oct. 6), but resumed in
1845.

ACTINIA, ak-tin'i-a, _n._ a genus of marine animals of the class Polypi,
growing on rocks or shells, with numerous tentacles or rays like the petals
of a flower, from which they are often called animal flowers or
sea-anemones. [From Gr. _aktis_, _aktinos_, a ray.]

ACTINIFORM, ak-tin'i-form, _adj._ having a radiated form. [Gr. _aktis_,
_aktinos_, ray, and FORM.]

ACTINISM, ak'tin-izm, _n._ the chemical force of the sun's rays, as
distinct from light and heat.--_adj._ AC'TINIC. [Gr. _aktis_, _aktinos_, a
ray.]

ACTINOLITE, ak-tin'[=o]-l[=i]t, _n._ a green variety of hornblende. [Gr.
_aktis_, _akt[=i]nos_, a ray, _lithos_, a stone.]

ACTINOMETER, ak-tin-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
heat-intensity of the sun's rays or the actinic effect of light-rays. [Gr.
_aktis_, _aktinos_, ray, and METER.]

ACTINOMYCES, ak-ti-no-m[=i]'sez, _n._ the tiny ray-fungus.--_n._
ACTINOMYC[=O]'SIS, an inflammatory disease in cattle, swine, and sometimes
man, caused by that fungus. [Gr. _aktis_, _aktinos_, ray, and _myces_,
mushroom.]

ACTINOZOA, ak'tin-[=o]-z[=o]'a, _n.pl._ one of the three classes of
Coelenterata, including sea-anemones, dead-men's fingers, corals, &c. [Gr.
_aktis_, _-inos_, a ray; _z[=o]a_, animals.]

ACTION, ak'shun, _n._ a state of acting: activity in the abstract: a deed:
operation: gesture: a battle: a lawsuit, or proceedings in a court: the
movement of events in a drama, novel, &c.--_adj._ AC'TIONABLE, liable to a
lawsuit.--_n._ AC'TION-TAK'ING (_Shak._), resenting an injury by a lawsuit
instead of fighting it out like a man of honour.

ACTIVATE, ak'ti-v[=a]t, _v.t._ (_Bacon_) to make active:--_pr.p._
ac'tiv[=a]ting; _pa.p._ ac'tiv[=a]ted.

ACTIVE, akt'iv, _adj._ that acts: busy: nimble: practical, as opposed to
speculative: effective: (_gram._) transitive.--_adv._ ACT'IVELY.--_ns._
ACTIV'ITY, ACT'IVENESS.

ACTON, ak'tun, _n._ a stuffed leather jacket which used to be worn under a
coat of mail. [O. Fr. _auqueton_, through Sp. from Ar. _al-q[=u]tun_.]

ACTUAL, akt'[=u]-al, _adj._ real: existing in fact and now, as opp. to an
imaginary or past state of things.--_v.t._ ACT'UALISE, to make actual: to
realise in action.--_n._ ACTUAL'ITY.--_adv._ ACT'UALLY.

ACTUARY, akt'[=u]-ar-i, _n._ a registrar or clerk: one who makes the
calculations connected with an insurance office.--_adj._ ACTUA'RIAL. [L.
_actuarius (scriba)_, an amanuensis, a clerk.]

ACTUATE, akt'[=u]-[=a]t, _v.t._ to put into or incite to action: to
influence.--_n._ ACTU[=A]'TION. [L. _actus_, action. See ACT.]

ACULEATED, ak-[=u]l-e-[=a]t'ed, _p.adj._ pointed: (_fig._) pungent,
incisive. [L. _aculeatus_, _aculeus_, dim. of _acus_, needle.]

ACUMEN, ak-[=u]'men, _n._ sharpness: quickness of perception: penetration.
[L. See ACUTE.]

ACUMINATE, a-k[=u]'min-[=a]t, _adj._ (_bot._) having a long tapering
point--also AC[=U]'MINATED.--_v.t._ AC[=U]'MINATE, to sharpen: (_fig._)
give point to.--_n._ ACCUMIN[=A]'TION. [L. _acuminatum_, pa.p. of
_acumin[=a]re_, to make pointed--_acumen_, a point. See ACUMEN.]

ACUPRESSURE, ak-[=u]-presh'[=u]r, _n._ a mode of arresting hemorrhage from
cut arteries, by inserting a needle into the flesh so as to press across
the mouth of the artery. [L. _acus_, a needle, and PRESSURE.]

ACUPUNCTURE, ak-[=u]-pungkt'[=u]r, _n._ an operation for relieving pain by
puncturing the flesh with needles. [L. _acus_, a needle, and PUNCTURE.]

ACUTE, ak-[=u]t', _adj._ sharp-pointed: keen: opp. of dull: shrewd: shrill:
critical.--_adv._ ACUTE'LY.--_n._ ACUTE'NESS.--ACUTE ANGLE, an angle less
than a right angle (see ANGLE); ACUTE DISEASE, one coming to a violent
crisis, as opp. to _Chronic_. [L. _acutus_, pa.p. of _acu[)e]re_, to
sharpen, from root _ak_, sharp.]

ADAGE, ad'[=a]j, _n._ an old saying: a proverb. [Fr.--L. _adagium_, from
_ad_, to, and root of _aio_, I say.]

ADAGIO, a-d[=a]'g[=i]-o, _adv._ (_mus._) slowly.--_n._ a slow movement: a
piece in adagio time. [It. _ad agio_, at ease.]

ADAM, ad'am, _n._ the first man: unregenerate human nature: a gaoler.--_n._
AD'AMITE, one descended from Adam: one of a 2d-century heretical sect in
Northern Africa, and in the 15th in Germany, whose members, claiming the
primitive innocence of Eden, went about naked.--_adjs._ ADAMIT'IC,
-AL.--_n._ AD'AMITISM.

ADAMANT, ad'a-mant, _n._ a very hard stone: the diamond.--_adjs._
ADAMANT[=E]'AN (_Milton_), hard as adamant; ADAMAN'TINE, made of or like
adamant: that cannot be broken or penetrated. [L. and Gr. _adamas_,
_-antos_--_a_, neg., and _damaein_, to break, to tame. See TAME.]

ADAMIC, a-dam'ik, _adj._ relating to Adam.

ADAM'S-APPLE, ad'amz-ap'pl, _n._ the angular projection of the thyroid
cartilage of the larynx in front of the throat, so called from an idea that
part of the forbidden fruit stuck in Adam's throat.--ADAM'S ALE or WINE,
water.

ADANSONIA, ad-an-s[=o]'ni-a, _n._ the baobab, monkey-bread, or
calabash-tree of West Africa. [So called from _Adanson_, a French botanist
(1727-1806).]

ADAPT, ad-apt', _v.t._ to make apt or fit: to accommodate (with _to_ or
_for_).--_ns._ ADAPTABIL'ITY, ADAPT'ABLENESS.--_adj._ ADAPT'ABLE, that may
be adapted.--_n._ ADAPT[=A]'TION, the act of making suitable: fitness:
(_biol._) the process of advantageous variation and progressive
modification by which organisms are adjusted to the conditions of their
life--the perfected result of adaptation being a life in harmony with the
environment. [Fr.--L. _adapt[=a]re_--_ad_, to, and _apt[=a]re_, to fit.]

ADAR, [=a]'dar, _n._ the twelfth month of the Jewish ecclesiastical, the
sixth of the civil, year, corresponding to the later part of February and
the first part of March. [Heb. _ad[=a]r_.]

ADAYS, a-d[=a]z', _adv._ nowadays: at the present time. [Prep. _a_, and
gen. sing. of DAY, A.S. _ondæye_.]

ADD, ad, _v.t._ to put (one thing) to (another): to sum up (with _to_): to
increase.--_adjs._ ADD'ABLE, ADD'IBLE.--_ns._ ADDIBIL'ITY; ADDIT'AMENT
(_Charles Lamb_), an addition; ADDI'TION, the act of adding: the thing
added: the rule in arithmetic for adding numbers together: title,
honour.--_adj._ ADDI'TIONAL, that is added. [L.--_addëre_--_ad_, to,
_dãre_, to put.]

ADDAX, ad'aks, _n._ a species of large antelope found in Africa, with long
twisted horns. [African word.]

ADDEEM, ad-d[=e]m', _v.t._ to deem: to adjudge: to award. [Pfx. _ad-_, and
DEEM.]

ADDENDUM, ad-den'dum, _n._ a thing to be added: an appendix:--_pl._
ADDEN'DA. [L. See ADD.]

ADDER, ad'[.e]r, _n._ the popular English name of the viper.--_ns._
AD'DER'S-TONGUE, a genus of ferns the seeds of which grow on a spike
resembling a serpent's tongue; AD'DER'S-WORT, a wort or plant, so called
from its being supposed to cure the bite of serpents--also called
_Snakeweed_. [A.S. _nædre_; cf. Ger. _atter_ for _natter_. _An adder_ came
by mistake into use for _a nadder_; the reverse mistake is _a newt_ for _an
ewt_ or _eft_.]

ADDICT, ad-dikt', _v.t._ to give (one's self) up to (generally in a bad
sense): (_B._) to devote or dedicate one's self to.--_adjs._ ADDICT',
ADDICT'ED, given up to (with _to_).--_ns._ ADDICT'EDNESS, ADDIC'TION. [L.
_addic[)e]re_, _addictum_--_ad_, to, _dic[)e]re_, to declare.]

ADDLE, ad'dl, ADDLED, ad'dld, _adj._ diseased: putrid: barren,
empty.--_adjs._ AD'DLE-HEAD'ED, AD'DLE-PAT'ED, having a head or pate with
addled brains.--_n._ AD'DLEMENT. [M.E. _adele_--A.S. _adela_, mud; cf.
Scot, _eddle_, liquid manure.]

ADDOOM, ad-d[=oo]m', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to doom, to adjudge, to award. [Pfx.
_a-_, and DOOM.]

ADDORSED, ad-dorst', _p.adj._ (_her._) turned back to back.

ADDRESS, ad-dres', _v.t._ to direct (with _to_): to speak or write to: to
court: to direct in writing: to arrange properly: (_arch._) to don:
(_refl._) to turn one's skill or energies towards.--_n._ a formal
communication in writing: a speech: manners: dexterity: direction of a
letter:--_pl._ ADDRESS'ES, attentions of a lover.--TO ADDRESS ONE'S SELF TO
A TASK, to set about it. [Fr. _adresser_--Low L. _addirecti[=a]re_--L.
_ad_, to, _directum_, straight. See DRESS, DIRECT.]

ADDUCE, ad-d[=u]s', _v.t._ to bring forward: to cite or quote.--_adj._
ADD[=U]C'ENT, drawing forward or together, as of the adductor
muscles.--_n._ ADD[=U]C'ER.--_adj._ ADD[=U]C'IBLE.--_n._ ADDUC'TION, the
act of adducing or bringing forward: the movement by which a part of the
body is drawn forward by muscles.--_adj._ ADDUC'TIVE, tending to bring
forward. [L. _adduc[)e]re_--_ad_, to, and _ducUere_, to bring.]

ADDUCTOR, ad-dukt'ur, _n._ a muscle which draws one part towards another.
[See ABDUCTOR.]

ADDULCE, ad-duls', _v.t._ (_obs._) to make sweet. [O. Fr. _adoulcir_--L.
_ad_, to, _dulcis_, sweet.]

ADELPHOUS, a-del'fus, _adj._ (_bot._) united in brotherhoods or bundles, as
stamens. [Gr. _adelphos_, brother.]

ADENITIS, ad-en-[=i]'tis, _n._ inflammation of the lymphatic glands. [Gr.
_ad[=e]n_, a gland, _-itis_, denoting inflammation.]

ADENOID, -AL, ad'en-oid, -al, _adj._ of a gland-like shape: glandular. [Gr.
_ad[=e]n_, a gland, _eidos_, form.]

ADENOTOMY, ad-en-ot'o-mi, _n._ a cutting or incision of a gland. [Gr.
_ad[=e]n_, a gland, _tom[=e]_, a cutting.]

ADEPT, ad-ept', or ad'ept, _adj._ completely skilled (_in_).--_n._ a
proficient.--_n._ ADEP'TION (_Bacon_), attainment. [L. _adeptus_ (_artem_),
having attained (an art), _pa.p._ of _adipisci_, to attain--_ad_, to, and
_apisci._]

ADEQUATE, ad'e-kw[=a]t, _adj._ equal to: proportionate: sufficient.--_adv._
AD'EQUATELY.--_ns._ AD'EQUATENESS, AD'EQUACY, state of being adequate:
sufficiency. [L. _adæquatus_, made equal--_ad_, to, and _æquus_, equal.]

ADES, _n._ an obsolete variant of HADES.

ADHERE, ad-h[=e]r', _v.i._ to stick to: to remain fixed or attached (with
_to_): (_Shak._) to be consistent: (_Scots law_) to affirm a
judgment.--_n._ ADHER'ENCE, state of adhering: steady attachment.--_adj._
ADHER'ENT, sticking to.--_n._ one who adheres: a follower: a partisan (with
_of_)--a less common form is ADHER'ER. [L. _ad_, to, _hær[=e]re_, _hæsum_,
to stick.]

ADHESION, ad-h[=e]'zhun, _n._ the act of adhering or sticking to: steady
attachment: (_path._) a vital union between two surfaces of a living body
which have been either naturally or artificially separated.--_adj._
ADHES'IVE, sticky: apt to adhere.--_adv._ ADHES'IVELY.--_n._ ADHES'IVENESS.
[See ADHERE.]

ADHIBIT, ad-hib'it, _v.t._ to apply to: to use: to attach: to admit: to
devote to: to administer.--_n._ ADHIBI'TION, application: use. [L.
_adhib[=e]re_, _-itum_--_ad_, to, and _hab[=e]re_, to hold.]

ADIANTUM, ad-i-an'tum, _n._ maidenhair, a large genus of ferns. [Gr.
_adiantos_, _a_, neg., and _diantos_, capable of being wetted.]

ADIAPHORON, a-di-af'or-on, _n.pl._ in theology and ethics, things
indifferent--any tenet or usage which is considered as non-essential--also
ADIAPH'ORA.--_n._ ADIAPH'ORISM, tolerance in regard to non-essential points
in theology.--_adj._ ADIAPH'OROUS. [Gr., from _a_, neg., and _diaphoros_,
differing--_dia_, apart, _pherein_, to carry.]

ADIATHERMIC, [=a]-d[=i]-a-th[.e]r'mik, _adj._ impervious to radiant heat.
[Gr. _a_, neg., _dia_, through, _thermos_, heat.]

ADIEU, a-d[=u]', _adv._ (I commend you) to God: farewell.--_n._ a
farewell:--_pl._ ADIEUS or ADIEUX (a-d[=u]z'). [Fr. _à Dieu_, to God.]

ADIPOCERE, ad'i-p[=o]-s[=e]r, _n._ a fatty, waxy substance resulting from
the decomposition of animal bodies in moist places or under water, but not
exposed to air. [Through Fr. from L. _adeps_, _adipis_, soft fat, and
_cera_, wax.]

ADIPOSE, ad'i-p[=o]z, _adj._ fatty.--ADIPOSE TISSUE, the vesicular
structure in the animal body which contains the fat. [L. _adeps_, _adipis_,
soft fat.]

ADIT, ad'it, _n._ an opening or passage, esp. into a mine. [L.
_aditus--ad_, to, _[=i]re_, _itum_, to go.]

ADJACENT, ad-j[=a]s'ent, _adj._ lying near to: contiguous.--_n._
ADJAC'ENCY, the state of being near: that which is adjacent.--_adv._
ADJAC'ENTLY. [L. _ad_, to, _jac[=e]re_, to lie.]

ADJECTIVE, ad'jek-tiv, _n._ a word added to a noun to qualify it, or limit
it by reference to quality, number, or position.--_adj._
ADJECT[=I]V'AL.--_adv._ AD'JECTIVELY. [L. _adjectivum (nomen)_, an added
(noun)--_adjic[)e]re_, _-jectum_, to throw to, to add--_ad_, to,
_jac[)e]re_, to throw.]

ADJOIN, ad-join', _v.i._ to lie next to.--_adj._ ADJOIN'ING, joining to:
near: adjacent.--_n._ AD'JOINT, a civil officer who assists a French maire:
an assistant professor in a French college. [Through Fr. from L.
_adjung[)e]re_. See JOIN.]

ADJOURN, ad-jurn', _v.t._ to put off to another day: to postpone: to
discontinue a meeting in order to reconstitute it at another time or
place.--_v.i._ to suspend proceedings and disperse for any time specified,
or _sine die_, without such time being specified.--_n._ ADJOURN'MENT, the
act of adjourning: the interval it causes.--(_obs._) ADJOURN'AL. [O. Fr.
_ajorner_--Low L. _adiurn[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, Low L. _jurnus_, L.
_diurnus_, daily. See JOURNAL.]

ADJUDGE, ad-juj', _v.t._ to decide: to assign.--_n._ ADJUDG'MENT, the act
of adjudging: sentence. [O. Fr. _ajuger_--L. _adjudic[=a]re_. See JUDGE.]

ADJUDICATE, ad-j[=oo]'di-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to determine judicially: to
pronounce.--_v.i._ to pronounce judgment.--_ns._ ADJUDIC[=A]'TION (_Eng.
law_), an order of the Bankruptcy Court, adjudging the debtor to be a
bankrupt, and transferring his property to a trustee; ADJ[=U]'DICATOR. [L.
_adjudic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_.]

ADJUNCT, ad'junkt, _adj._ joined or added to.--_n._ the thing joined or
added, as a qualifying addition to a name expressing any personal quality,
or the like: a person joined to another in some office or service:
(_gram._) any word or clause enlarging the subject or predicate: (_logic_)
any accompanying quality or non-essential attribute.--_n._ ADJUNC'TION, the
act of joining: the thing joined.--_adj._ ADJUNCT'IVE, joining.--_advs._
ADJUNCT'IVELY, ADJUNCT'LY, in connection with. [L. See JOIN.]

ADJURATION, ad-j[=oo]r-[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of adjuring: the charge or
oath used in adjuring.--_adj._ ADJUR'ATORY, containing an
adjuration.--_p.adj._ ADJUR'ING, acting as an adjuration. [Fr.--L.
_adjuration-em_.]

ADJURE, ad-j[=oo]r', _v.t._ to charge on oath or solemnly: to cause to
swear (_B._ and _Milton_). [L.--_ad_, to, _jur[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to
swear.]

ADJUST, ad-just', _v.t._ to arrange properly (with _to_): to regulate: to
settle.--_adj._ ADJUST'ABLE.--_n._ ADJUST'MENT, arrangement. [O. Fr.
_ajouster_--Low L. _adjuxt[=a]re_, to put side by side--L. _juxta_, near].

ADJUTAGE, ad'joo-t[=a]j, _n._ Same as _Ajutage_.

ADJUTANT, ad'joot-ant, _n._ a regimental staff officer not above the rank
of major, specially appointed to assist the commanding officer of a
garrison or regiment--there are also adjutants of auxiliary forces, of
depôts, of brigade, &c.: a large species of stork or crane found in
India.--_ns._ AD'JUTANCY, the office of an adjutant: assistance;
AD'JUTANT-GEN'ERAL, the head of his department on the general staff of the
army, the executive officer of the commander-in-chief. [L. _adjut[=a]re_ =
_adjuv[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _juv[=a]re_, to assist.]

ADMEASURE, ad-mezh'[=u]r, _v.t._ to measure: to apportion:--_pr.p._
admeas'[=u]ring; _pa.p._ admeas'[=u]red.--_n._ ADMEAS'UREMENT (see
MEASUREMENT). [Fr.--Late L. _admensur[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _mensura_,
MEASURE.]

ADMINICLE, ad-min'i-kl, _n._ anything that aids or supports: an auxiliary:
(_law_) any corroboratory evidence.--_adj._ ADMINIC'ULAR.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ ADMINIC'ULATE. [L. _adminiculum_, a support--_ad_, to, _manus_,
hand.]

ADMINISTER, ad-min'is-t[.e]r, _v.t._ to manage as a steward, substitute, or
executor: to supply: to conduct or execute, as offices of religion: to
apply: to impose.--_v.i._ to bring aid (with to).--_adjs._ ADMIN'ISTRABLE,
that may be administered; ADMIN'ISTRANT.--_n._ ADMINISTR[=A]'TION, the act
of administering: management: dispensation of sacraments: the power or
party that administers the government of the country.--_adj._
ADMIN'ISTRATIVE, that administers.--_n._ ADMINISTR[=A]'TOR, one who manages
or directs: the person to whom is committed, under a commission entitled
LETTERS OF ADMINISTRATION, the administration or distribution of the
personal estate of any one dying intestate or leaving a will in which no
executor is named:--_fem._ ADMINISTR[=A]'TRIX.--_n._ ADMINISTR[=A]'TORSHIP.
[Through Fr. from L. _administr[=a]re_--ad, to, and _ministr[=a]re_, to
minister.]

ADMIRAL, ad'mir-al, _n._ the chief commander of a navy--the ancient English
title of Lord High Admiral is now in abeyance, his functions falling to the
five Lord Commissioners of the Admiralty, and the High Court of Admiralty:
a naval officer of the highest rank. In the British navy, admirals are
distinguished into three classes--AD'MIRALS, VICE'-AD'MIRALS, and
REAR'-AD'MIRALS; the admiral carrying his colour at the main, the
vice-admiral at the fore, and the rear-admiral at the mizzen mast-head. In
former times each grade was subdivided into three sections, known as
admirals (or vice- or rear-admirals) of the Red, of the White, and of the
Blue, respectively: admiral-ship (Milton's _ammiral_) or flag-ship: the
chief ship in a fleet of merchantmen.--_ns._ AD'MIRALSHIP, the office of an
admiral; AD'MIRALTY, the board of commissioners for the administration of
naval affairs: the building where these transact business. [Through Fr.
from Ar. _am[=i]r_, a lord, a chief.]

ADMIRE, ad-m[=i]r', _v.t._ to have a high opinion of: to love.--_v.i._
(_arch._) to be affected with wonder at.--_adj._ AD'MIRABLE, worthy of
being admired.--_n._ AD'MIRABLENESS.--_adv._ AD'MIRABLY.--_ns._ ADMIR'ANCE
(_Spens._), admiration; ADMIR[=A]'TION, the act of admiring: wonder,
together with esteem, love, or veneration: (_B._, _Shak._, and _Milton_)
astonishment.--_adj._ AD'MIRATIVE.--_n._ ADM[=I]R'ER, one who admires: a
lover.--_adv._ ADM[=I]R'INGLY. [Fr. _admirer_--L. _ad_, at, _mir[=a]ri_, to
wonder.]

ADMIT, ad-mit', _v.t._ to allow to enter: to let in: to concede: to
acknowledge: to be capable of:--_pr.p._ admit'ting; _pa.p._
admit'ted.--_n._ ADMISSIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ ADMIS'SIBLE, that may be admitted
or allowed (generally, or specially as legal proof).--_ns._ ADMIS'SION,
ADMIT'TANCE, the act of admitting: anything admitted or conceded: leave to
enter.--_adj._ ADMIT'TABLE, that may be admitted.--_adv._ ADMIT'TEDLY.
[Through Fr. from L. _admitt[)e]re_, _-missum_--_ad_, to, _mitt[)e]re_, to
send.]

ADMIX, ad-miks', _v.t._ to mix with something else.--_n._ ADMIX'TURE, what
is added to the chief ingredient of a mixture. [L. _ad_, to, and MIX.]

ADMONISH, ad-mon'ish, _v.t._ to warn: to reprove mildly.--_n._
ADMON'ISHMENT, admonition. [O. Fr. _admonester_--Late L.
_admonest[=a]re_--_admonere_--_ad_, to, _monere_, to warn.]

ADMONITION, ad-mon-ish'un, _n._ kind reproof: counsel: advice:
ecclesiastical censure.--_adjs._ ADMON'ITIVE, ADMON'ITORY, containing
admonition.--_n._ ADMON'ITOR. [L. _admonition-em_. See ADMONISH.]

ADNASCENT, ad-nas'ent, _adj._ growing to or upon. [L. _adnascens_,
_-entis_, pr.p. of _adnasci_--_ad_, to, _nasci_, _natus_, to grow.]

ADNATE, ad-n[=a]t', _adj._ (_bot._) growing close to the stem. [L.
_adnatus_, usually _agnatus_--_ad_, to, _(g)natus_, born.]

ADO, a-d[=oo]', _n._ a to do: bustle: trouble: difficulty: stir or fuss.
[Contr. of _at do_ = _to do_, a form of the infin. borrowed from the
Scandinavian.]

ADOBE, a-d[=o]'b[=a], _n._ and _adj._ a sun-dried brick, or made of such.
[Sp. _adobar_, to plaster.]

ADOLESCENT, ad-o-les'ent, _adj._ growing to manhood.--_n._ ADOLES'CENCE,
the period of youth, in man, from 14 to 25; in woman, from 12 to 21.
[Through Fr. from L. _adolescent-em_, _adolesc[)e]re_, to grow,
_adol[=e]re_, to magnify.]

ADONIS, a-d[=o]'nis, _n._ a beautiful youth, beloved by Aphrodite (Venus):
a beau or dandy.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ AD'ONISE, to make beautiful.

ADOORS, a-d[=o]rz', _adv._ (_obs._) at doors: at the door. [Prep, _a_, at,
and DOOR.]

ADOPT, ad-opt', _v.t._ to choose: to take up or embrace: to take into any
relationship: to take as one's own what is another's, as a child,
&c.--_ns._ ADOP'TIANISM, an 8th-century heresy akin to Nestorianism, that
Christ, in respect of his divine nature, was doubtless the Son of God; but
that, as to his human nature, he was only declared and adopted to be the
first-born Son of God; ADOP'TION, the act of adopting: the state of being
adopted: assumption: the taking into one language of words from another:
formal acceptance: choice: (_theol._) an act of divine grace by which the
redeemed in Christ are admitted to the privileges of the sons of
God.--_adjs._ ADOP'TIOUS (_Shak._), adopted; ADOPT'IVE, that adopts or is
adopted. [L. _adopt[=a]re_--_ad_, to, and, _opt[=a]re_, to choose.]

ADORE, ad-[=o]r', _v.t._ to worship: to love intensely.--_adj._ ADOR'ABLE,
worthy of being adored.--_n._ ADOR'ABLENESS.--_adv._ ADOR'ABLY.--_ns._
ADOR[=A]'TION, divine worship, homage: profound regard; ADOR'ER, one who
adores: a lover.--_adv._ ADOR'INGLY. [L. _ad_, to, _or[=a]re_, to pray. See
ORACLE.]

ADORN, ad-orn', _v.t._ to deck or dress: to embellish.--_n._ (_Spens._)
adornment.--_adj._ (_Milton_) adorned, ornate.--_n._ ADORN'MENT, ornament:
decoration. [O. Fr. _aörner_, _adorner_--L. _adorn[=a]re_--_ad_, to,
_orn[=a]re_, to furnish.]

ADOWN, a-down', _adv._ and _prep._ down. [A.S. _of-dúne_--_of_, from,
_dun_, a hill. See DOWN, a bank.]

ADRAD, a-drad', ADREAD, a-dred', _adj._ (_obs._) in a state of fear. [Prob.
from A.S. _of-drad_, _of-drede_, to terrify. See DREAD.]

ADRIFT, a-drift', _adj._ or _adv._ floating as driven (by the wind): moving
at random. [Prep. _a_, and DRIFT.]

ADROIT, a-droit', _adj._ dexterous: skilful.--_adv._ ADROIT'LY.--_n._
ADROIT'NESS. [Fr. _à droit_, according to right--L. _directus_, straight.
See DIRECT.]

ADRY, a-dr[=i]', _adv._ thirsty. [Pfx. _a-_, and DRY.]

ADSCITITIOUS, ad-sit-ish'us, _adj._ added or assumed: additional. [L.
_adscisc[)e]re_, _-sc[=i]tum_, to take or assume--_ad_, to, _scisc[)e]re_,
to inquire--_sc[=i]re_, to know.]

ADSCRIPT, ad'skript, _adj._ written after: attached to the soil, of feudal
serfs--in this sense also used as a noun. [L. _adscriptus_--_ad_, to,
_scrib[)e]re_, to write.]

ADULATE, ad'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to fawn upon, to flatter:--_pr.p._
ad'[=u]l[=a]ting; _pa.p._ ad'[=u]l[=a]ted.--_n._ AD'ULATOR, a servile
flatterer.--_adj._ ADULATORY (ad'[=u]-l[=a]-tor-i). [L. _adul[=a]ri_,
_adulatus_, to fawn upon.]

ADULATION, ad-[=u]-l[=a]'shun, _n._ fawning: flattery. [L. _adul[=a]ri_,
_adulatus_, to fawn upon.]

ADULLAMITE, ad-ul'am-[=i]t, _adj._ an inhabitant of Adullam, where was a
cave to which flocked from all sides to David in exile men in debt,
distress, or discontent (1 Sam. xxii. 1, 2). The name was applied by John
Bright in 1866 to a Whig secession from the Liberal party.

ADULT, ad-ult', _adj._ grown: mature.--_n._ a grown-up person.--_n._
ADULT'NESS. [L. _adultus_--_adolesc[)e]re_, to grow. See ADOLESCENT.]

ADULTERATE, ad-ult'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to corrupt: to make impure (by
mixing).--_v.i._ (_obs._) to commit adultery.--_adj._ defiled by adultery:
spurious: corrupted by base elements.--_ns._ ADULT'ERANT, the person or
substance that adulterates; ADULTER[=A]'TION, the act of adulterating: the
state of being adulterated. [See ADULTERY.]

ADULTERY, ad-ult'[.e]r-i, _n._ violation of the marriage-bed, whether one's
own or another's: in Scripture applied loosely to unchastity
generally.--_n._ ADULT'ERER, a man guilty of adultery:--_fem._
ADULT'ERESS.--_adj._ ADULT'ERINE, resulting from adultery: spurious.--_n._
the offspring of adultery.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ ADULT'ERISE
(_arch._).--_adj._ ADULT'EROUS, guilty of adultery. [O. Fr. _avoutrie_,
_avoutre_, an adulterer--L. _adulterum_, prob. from _ad_, to, and _alter_,
another. The modern form of the word is due to a later approximation to the
Latin form.]

ADUMBRATE, ad-um'br[=a]t, or ad'-, _v.t._ to give a faint shadow of: to
exhibit imperfectly.--_adjs._ ADUM'BRANT, ADUM'BRATIVE, adumbrating or
giving a faint shadow.--_n._ ADUMBR[=A]'TION. [L. _adumbratus_,
_adumbr[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _umbra_, a shadow.]

ADUST, a-dust', _adj._ burnt up or scorched; browned with the sun. [L.
_adustus_, pa.p. of _adur[)e]re_, to burn up.]

ADVANCE, ad-vans', _v.t._ to put forward: to promote to a higher office: to
encourage the progress of: to propose: to supply beforehand: to pay before
the money is legally due, to pay on security.--_v.i._ to move or go
forward: to make progress: to rise in rank or in value.--_n._ progress:
improvement: a rise in price or value: a giving beforehand, also the sum so
given: a loan.--_n._ ADVANCE'MENT, promotion: improvement: payment of money
in advance.--IN ADVANCE, beforehand. [O. Fr. _avancer_--Late L. _abante_
(Fr. _avant_)--L. _ab ante_, from before.]

ADVANTAGE, ad-vant'[=a]j, _n._ superiority over another: gain or benefit:
at tennis, the point gained by either side after _deuce_, when both sides
stand at an equal score (more commonly VANT'AGE).--_v.t._ to benefit or
profit.--_adjs._ ADVAN'TAGEABLE, profitable: convenient (_rare_);
ADVANT[=A]'GEOUS, of advantage: useful (with _to_ and _for_).--_adv._
ADVANT[=A]'GEOUSLY.--_n._ ADVANT[=A]'GEOUSNESS.--TO HAVE THE ADVANTAGE OF
ANY ONE, to be known by a person without one's self knowing him; TO TAKE AT
ADVANTAGE, to avail one's self of any opportunity, often implying an unfair
sense. [Fr. _avantage_ (It. _vantaggio_)--Fr. _avant_, before. See
ADVANCE.]

ADVENE, ad-v[=e]n', _v.i._ to accede: to be superadded to. [Through Fr.
from L. _adven[=i]re_, to come to.]

ADVENT, ad'vent, _n._ a coming or arrival: the first or the second coming
of Christ: the period immediately before the festival of the Nativity,
including four Sundays--from the first after St Andrew's Day (November 30)
to Christmas eve.--_n._ AD'VENTIST, one who believes in the second coming
of Christ to set up a kingdom on the earth: a millenarian--_adj._
ADVENT'UAL (_obs._), relating to Advent. [Through Fr. from L.
_adventus_--_ad_, to, _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

ADVENTITIOUS, ad-vent-ish'us, _adj._ accidental: additional: foreign:
appearing casually.--_adv._ ADVENTI'TIOUSLY.--_adj._ ADVENT'IVE (_Bacon_),
adventitious.--_n._ a thing or person coming from without. [See ADVENT.]

ADVENTURE, ad-vent'[=u]r, _n._ a risk or chance: a remarkable incident: an
enterprise: trial of the issue: risk: a commercial speculation: the spirit
of enterprise.--_v.i._ to attempt or dare.--_v.t._ to risk or hazard:
(_refl._) to venture.--_v.i._ to risk one's self (with _on_, _into_,
_upon_): to dare, go so far as to.--_n._ ADVENT'URER, one who engages in
hazardous enterprises: a soldier of fortune, or speculator: one who pushes
his fortune by equivocal means, as false pretences, &c.:--_fem._
ADVENT'URESS.--_adjs._ ADVENT'UROUS, ADVENT'URESOME, enterprising: ready to
incur risk.--_adv._ ADVENT'UROUSLY.--_n._ ADVENT'UROUSNESS. [O. Fr.--L.
_adventurus_, about to happen, fut. perf. of _adven[=i]re_. See ADVENT.]

ADVERB, ad'v[.e]rb, _n._ a word added to a verb, adjective, or other adverb
to express some modification of the meaning or an accompanying
circumstance.--_adj._ ADVERB'IAL, pertaining to an adverb--used also as a
_n._--_adv._ ADVERB'IALLY. [L. _ad verbium_--_ad_, to, _verbum_, a word. It
is so called, not because it is added to a verb, but because it is a word
(_verbum_) joined to, or supplemental of, other words.]

ADVERSARIA, ad-v[.e]rs-[=a]r'i-a, _n.pl._ collections of miscellaneous
things in a commonplace-book: consecutive notes on any book. [L., lit.
things written on the opposite sides of the paper, from _adversus_,
against.]

ADVERSARY, ad'v[.e]rs-ar-i, _n._ an opponent: an enemy: Satan, as the
general adversary of mankind. [O. Fr. _aversier_--L. _adversarius_. See
ADVERSE.]

ADVERSATIVE, ad-v[.e]rs'a-tiv, _adj._ denoting opposition, contrariety, or
variety. [See ADVERSE.]

ADVERSE, ad'v[.e]rs, _adj._ acting in a contrary direction (with _to_):
opposed to: unfortunate: injurious.--_adv._ AD'VERSELY.--_ns._
AD'VERSENESS, ADVERS'ITY, adverse circumstances: affliction: misfortune.
[Through Fr. from L. _adversus_--_ad_, to, and _vert[)e]re_, _versum_, to
turn.]

ADVERT, ad-v[.e]rt', _v.i._ to turn the mind to (with _to_): to refer to:
(_obs._) to regard or observe.--_ns._ ADVERT'ENCE, ADVERT'ENCY, attention
to: heedfulness: regard.--_adj._ ADVERT'ENT, attentive: heedful.--_adv._
ADVERT'ENTLY. [O. Fr. _avertir_, _avertiss-ant_--L. _advert[)e]re_--_ad_,
to, and _vert[)e]re_, to turn.]

ADVERTISE, ad-v[.e]rt-[=i]z', or ad'-, _v.t._ to turn one's attention to:
to inform: to give public information or announcement of: (_obs._) to
instruct.--_ns._ ADVERT'ISEMENT, the act of advertising or making known: a
public notice in a newspaper or periodical: notoriety: (_obs._) news;
ADVERT[=I]S'ER, one who advertises: a paper in which advertisements are
published.--_p.adj._ ADVERT[=I]S'ING (_Shak._), attentive. [Fr., from L.
See ADVERT.]

ADVICE, ad-v[=i]s', _n._ counsel: intelligence (usually in _pl._): formal
official intelligence about anything: specially skilled opinion, as of a
physician or lawyer.--_n._ ADVICE'-BOAT, a swift vessel employed in
conveying despatches.--_adjs._ ADVICE'FUL, AVIZE'FULL (_Spens._).--The form
ADVISO, advice, counsel (_Sir T. Browne_), and in CARAVAL OF ADVISO = an
advice-boat (_Fuller_), is obsolete--modern form AVISO. [O. Fr. _advis_
(Fr. _avis_)--L. _ad visum_, according to what is seen or seems best.]

ADVIEW. Same as AVIEW.

ADVISE, ad-v[=i]z', _v.t._ to give advice or counsel to: to recommend: to
inform (usually with _of_).--_v.i._ to consult (_with_): (_obs._) to
deliberate:--_pr.p._ adv[=i]s'ing; _pa.p._ adv[=i]sed'.--_ns._
ADVISABIL'ITY, ADVIS'ABLENESS.--_adj._ ADVIS'ABLE, that may be advised or
recommended: prudent: expedient: open to advice.--_adv._
ADVIS'ABLY.--_adjs._ ADVIS'ATORY (_rare_); ADVISED', cautious: deliberate,
as in _well-advised_ and _ill-advised_.--_adv._ ADVIS'EDLY,
intentionally.--_ns._ ADVIS'EDNESS, deliberate consideration: prudent
procedure; ADVISE'MENT (_obs._ or _arch._), counsel, deliberation;
ADVIS'ER, one who advises or gives advice; ADVIS'ING (_Shak._), counsel,
advice. [O. Fr. _aviser_, from _advis_ or _avis_. See ADVICE.]

ADVOCACY, ad'vo-ka-si, _n._ the function of an advocate: a pleading for:
defence. [See ADVOCATE.]

ADVOCATE, ad'vo-k[=a]t, _n._ an intercessor or defender: one who pleads the
cause of another, esp. in a court of law in Scotland and France.--_v.t._ to
plead in favour of: to recommend.--_ns._ ADVOC[=A]'TION; AD'VOCATOR.--LORD
ADVOCATE, the first law-officer of the crown and public prosecutor of
crimes for Scotland. [O. Fr. _avocat_--L. _advocatus_--_advoc[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _voc[=a]re_, to call: to call in (another to help, as
in a lawsuit or in sickness).]

ADVOUTRER, ad-vow'tr[.e]r, _n._ (_obs._) an adulterer:--_fem._ ADVOU'TRESS.
[See ADVOUTRY.]

ADVOUTRY, ad-vow'tri, _n._ (_obs._) adultery. [O. Fr. _avoutrie_--L.
_adulterium_.]

ADVOWSON, ad-vow'zun, _n._ the right of patronage or presentation to a
church benefice.--_n._ ADVOWEE', one who has the right of advowson. [O. Fr.
_avoëson_--L. _advocation-em_, right of the patron--L. _advocatus_, a
patron.]

ADYNAMIC, [=a]-di-nam'ik, _adj._ without strength: (_phys._) characterised
by the absence of force. [Gr. _a_, neg., and _dynamis_, strength.]

ADYTUM, ad'i-tum, _n._ the most sacred part of a heathen temple: the
chancel of a church:--_pl._ AD'YTA. [L.--Gr. _adyton_--_a_, neg., and
_dyein_, to enter.]

ADZE, ADZ, adz, _n._ a carpenter's tool consisting of a thin arched blade
with its edge at right angles to the handle. [A.S. _adesa_; ultimate origin
unknown.]

AE, [=a], or y[=a], modern Scotch form of A.S. _án_, one, used as an
adjective.

ÆDILE, EDILE, [=e]'d[=i]l, _n._ a magistrate in ancient Rome who had the
charge of public buildings, games, markets, police, &c.--_n._ Æ'DILESHIP.
[L. _æd[=i]lis_, _ædes_, _-is_, a building.]

ÆGIS, [=e]'jis, _n._ (_orig._) a shield given by Jupiter to Minerva:
anything that protects. [L.--Gr. _aígis_.]

ÆGLOGUE, an archaic form of ECLOGUE.

ÆGROTAT, [=e]'gr[=o]-tät, _n._ in the English universities, a medical
certificate of inability from illness to attend lectures or
examinations.--_n._ ÆGER ([=e]'j[.e]r), sick, the word used at Oxford and
Cambridge in excusing absence on account of illness, hence a note
certifying a student to be _æger_ or sick. [L., 'he is sick,' 3d pers.
sing. pres. indic. of _ægrot[=a]re_, to be sick; _æger_, sick.]

ÆNEID, [=e]'n[=e]-id, _n._ an epic poem written by Virgil, the hero of
which is Æneas. [L. _Æneis_, _-idos_.]

ÆOLIAN, [=e]-[=o]'li-an, _adj._ pertaining to or acted on by the wind:
aerial: of Æolis or Æolia, a district of Asia Minor colonised by the
Greeks.--Also Æ'[=O]LIC. [_Æolus_, the god of the winds.]

ÆOLIPILE, [=e]-ol'i-p[=i]l, _n._ an instrument consisting of a hollow ball
of metal partly filled with water, and having a small orifice through which
steam escapes on the application of heat, thus turning the ball. It is the
first instrument on record for showing the power of steam. [From L.
_Æolus_, and _pila_, ball.]

ÆON, EON, [=e]'on, _n._ a period of time, an age or one of a series of
ages, eternity: the personification of an age, a power emanating from the
supreme Deity, with its share in the creation and government of the
universe.--_adj._ Æ[=O]'NIAN, eternal. [Gr. _ai[=o]n_.]

AERATE, [=a]'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to put air into: to supply, or cause to
mix, with carbonic acid or other gas, as AERATED WATERS.--_ns._ A'ERATOR,
an apparatus for such purpose; AER[=A]'TION, exposure to the action of air:
the mixing or saturating with a gas: the oxygenation of the blood by
respiration. [L. _aër_, air.]

AERIAL, [=a]-[=e]r'i-al, _adj._ belonging to the air: inhabiting or
existing in the air: elevated, lofty, ethereal.--_ns._ AERIAL'ITY,
AER'IALNESS.--_adv._ AER'IALLY.

AERIE, [=a]'ri, or [=e]'ri, _n._ the nest of any bird of prey, esp. an
eagle: a house perched on some high or steep place: (_Shak._) the brood in
the nest, or a stock of children.--Also AERY, EYRIE, EYRY. [O. Fr. _aire_;
Low L. _aeria_, _aerea_--L. _area_, a spot of level ground. The form EYRY
seems to have been originally due to a confusion with M. E. _ey_, an egg.]

AERIFEROUS, [=a]-[.e]r-if'[.e]r-us, _adj._ carrying or containing air. [L.
_aër_, air, and _ferre_, to carry.]

AERIFORM, [=a]'[.e]r-i-form, _adj._ having the form or nature of air or
gas: unsubstantial, unreal. [L. _aër_, air, and _forma_, form.]

AERIFY, [=a]'[.e]r-i-f[=i], _v.t._ to change from a solid or liquid state
into air or gas: to fill or combine with air.--_n._ AERIFIC[=A]'TION, act
of being aerified or changed from a solid or liquid state into air or gas:
act of combining air with anything: state of being filled with air. [L.
_aër_, air, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

AEROBIA, [=a]-[.e]r-[=o]'bi-a, _n.pl._ (_biol._) bacteria that require free
oxygen for the maintenance of their vitality.--_adj._ AER[=O]'BIC.

AERODYNAMICS, [=a]-[.e]r-o-di-nam'iks, _n._ the science of the motion of
the air and other gases, and of their mechanical effects when in motion.
[Gr. _a[=e]r_, _aeros_, air, and _dynamis_, power.]

AEROLITE, [=a]'[.e]r-o-l[=i]t, _n._ a meteoric stone or meteorite--also
A'EROLITH.--_n._ AEROLITHOL'OGY, that branch of science which treats of
aerolites.--_adj._ AEROLIT'IC. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, air, _lithos_, a stone.]

AEROLOGY, [=a]-[.e]r-ol'o-ji, _n._ the branch of science which treats of
the atmosphere.--_adj._ AEROLOG'ICAL.--_n._ AEROL'OGIST. [Gr. _a[=e]r_,
_aeros_, air, _logos_, discourse.]

AEROMANCY, [=a]-[.e]r-om'an-si, _n._ divination by means of atmospheric
phenomena: weather forecasting. [Fr.--L.--Gr. _a[=e]r_, air, _manteia_,
divination.]

AEROMETER, [=a]-[.e]r-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
weight or density of air and gases. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, and METER.]

AEROMETRY, [=a]-[.e]r-om'e-tri, _n._ the measuring of the air, now called
pneumatics.--_adj._ AEROMET'RIC. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, _aeros_, air, _metron_, a
measure.]

AERONAUT, [=a]'[.e]r-o-nawt, _n._ one who makes ascents in a
balloon.--_adjs._ AERONAUT'IC, AERONAUT'ICAL.--_n._ AERONAUT'ICS, the
science or art of aerial navigation. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, air, _naut[=e]s_,
sailor.]

AEROPHYTE, [=a]'[.e]r-o-f[=i]t, _n._ a plant nourished by the air, as
epiphytal orchids and many lichens. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, air, _phyton_, a plant.]

AEROSTAT, [=a]'[.e]r-o-stat, _n._ a machine formed to sustain weights in
the air: a flying machine--sometimes applied in the newspapers to the
aeronaut himself.--_adj._ AEROSTAT'IC--_n._ AEROST[=A]'TION, the art of
raising and guiding balloons. [Gr. _a[=e]r_, _aeros_, air, and _statos_,
standing--_hist[=e]mi_, I cause to stand.]

AEROSTATICS, [=a]-[.e]r-o-stat'iks, _n._ the science of the equilibrium of
air or of elastic fluids: the science of raising and guiding balloons. [Gr.
_a[=e]r_, air, _statikos_, relating to equilibrium. See STATICS.]

ÆRUGINOUS, [=e]-roo'ji-nus, _adj._ pertaining to or like copper-rust or
verdigris. [L. _æruginosus_--_ærugo_, _æruginis_, rust of copper--_æs_,
_æris_, brass, copper.]

AERY, [=a]'[.e]r-i, _adj._ aerial, incorporeal, spiritual,
visionary.--_adj._ AE'RYLIGHT (_Milton_), light as air.--As a noun, AERY is
a variant spelling of AERIE.

ÆSTHETICS, [=e]s-thet'iks, _n._ the feeling of beauty in objects, the
principles of taste and of art: the philosophy of the fine arts.--_n._
ÆS'THETE, a professed disciple of æstheticism, one who affects an
extravagant love of art.--_adjs._ ÆSTHET'IC, ÆSTHET'ICAL, pertaining to
æsthetics.--_adv._ ÆSTHET'ICALLY.--_ns._ ÆSTHETI'CIAN, ÆSTHET'ICIST, one
devoted to æsthetics; ÆSTHET'ICISM, the principles of æsthetics: the cult
of the beautiful, applied esp. to an art movement in London in the last
quarter of the 19th century, which aimed at carrying art into every home
and every relation of life, but made itself ridiculous by its fantastic and
superficial dogmatism, and its puerility.--_v.t._ ÆSTHET'ICIZE, to render
æsthetic, to refine. [Gr. _aisth[=e]tikos_, perceptive--_aisthanesthai_, to
feel or perceive.]

ÆSTIVAL, es-t[=i]'val, _adj._ pertaining to the summer. [L.
_æstivalis_--_æstas_, summer.]

ÆSTIVATION, es-ti-v[=a]'shun, _n._ (_bot._) the manner of folding of the
petals in the flower-bud: (_zool._) the act of remaining dormant during the
dry season--opposed to _Hibernation_: (_Bacon_) the passing of the summer:
a summer retreat. [L. _æstivus_, relating to summer--_æstas_, summer.]

ÆTHRIOSCOPE, [=e]'thri-o-sk[=o]p, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
minute variations of temperature due to the condition of the sky. [Gr.
_aithria_, the open sky, _skopos_, an observer.]

ÆTIOLOGY, [=e]-ti-ol'o-ji, _n._ the science or philosophy of causation,
esp. an inquiry into the origin and causes of a disease.--_adj._
ÆTIOLOG'ICAL. [L.--Gr. _aitiologia_--_aitia_, cause, _logos_, discourse.]

AFAR, a-fär', _adv._ from a far distance (usually preceded by _from_): to a
distance (usually followed by _off_). [A.S. _feor_, with prep. _of_ or
_on_. See FAR.]

AFEAR, AFFEAR, a-f[=e]r', _v.t._ (_obs._) to terrify.--_adj._ AFEARD'
(_Shak._), affected with fear, afraid. [Pfx. _a-_, and A.S. _færan_, to
frighten.]

AFFABLE, af'fa-bl, _adj._ condescending: easy to be spoken to (used with
_to_).--_ns._ AFFABIL'ITY, AF'FABLENESS.--_adv._ AF'FABLY. [Fr.--L.
_affabilis_--_aff[=a]ri_, to speak to--_ad_, to, and _f[=a]ri_, to speak.]

AFFAIR, af-f[=a]r', _n._ that which is to be done: business: any small
matter: a battle of minor importance: a matter of intimate personal
concern, as a duel--a so-called affair of honour, or an intrigue: (_pl._)
transactions in general: public concerns. [O. Fr. _afaire_ (Fr.
_affaire_)--_à_ and _faire_--L. _ad_, and _fac[)e]re_, to do. Cf. ADO.]

AFFAMISH, af-fam'ish, _v.t._ and _v.i._ (_obs._) to cause to perish from
hunger. [Fr. _affamer_--L. _ad_, to, _fames_, hunger.]

AFFECT, af-fekt', _v.t._ to act upon: to produce a change upon: to move the
feelings: to assign, apply (only in _pass_.).--_adj._ AFFECT'ED, touched
with a feeling either for or against (with _by_): full of affectation:
feigned.--_adv._ AFFECT'EDLY.--_n._ AFFECT'EDNESS.--_adj._ AFFECT'ING,
having power to move the passions: pathetic.--_adv._ AFFECT'INGLY. [L.
_affic[)e]re_, _affectum_--_ad_, to, _fac[)e]re_, to do.]

AFFECT, af-fekt', _v.t._ to make a show or pretence of, to assume, to
counterfeit or pretend to, to take upon one's self to: (_obs._) to aim at,
seek to obtain: (_arch._) have a liking for, to love: to practise, wear, or
frequent: to haunt or inhabit by preference.--_n._ AFFECT[=A]'TION, a
striving after, or an attempt to assume, what is not natural or real:
pretence. [L. _affect[=a]re_, freq. of _affic[)e]re_. See AFFECT above.]

AFFECTION, af-fek'shun, _n._ kindness or love: attachment: (_Shak._)
affectation: an attribute or property: a disposition of mind: a disease or
abnormal state of body or mind.--_adjs._ AFFEC'TIONAL; AFFEC'TIONATE, full
of affection: loving: (_obs._) eager, passionate, well inclined to;
AFFEC'TIONATED (_obs._).--_adv._ AFFEC'TIONATELY.--_n._
AFFEC'TIONATENESS.--_adj._ AFFEC'TIONED (_B._), affected, disposed:
(_Shak._) full of affectation. [L. See AFFECT.]

AFFEER, af-f[=e]r', _v.t._ to fix the market value of: to reduce to a
certain fixed sum.--_adj._ AFFEERED' (_Shak._), confirmed.--_n._
AFFEER'MENT. [O. Fr. _affeurer_--Low L. _affor[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to,
_forum_, a market.]

AFFERENT, af'f[.e]r-ent, _adj._ (_anat._) bringing to, applied to the
nerves that convey sensations to the nerve centres. [L. _afferens_--_ad_,
to, and _ferre_, to carry.]

AFFETTUOSO, af-fet-t[=oo]-[=o]'so, _adj._ and _adv._ (_mus._) tender,
tenderly, with feeling--used as a noun by Burke.

AFFIANCE, af-f[=i]'ans, _n._ faith pledged to: marriage contract: trust:
affinity (_in_, _on_).--_v.t._ to pledge faith: to betroth.--_adj._ and
_n._ AFF[=I]'ANCED, betrothed. [O. Fr. _afiance_, _afier_--L. _ad_, to,
_fides_, faith.]

AFFIDAVIT, af-fi-d[=a]'vit, _n._ a written declaration on oath.
[_Affidavit_, 3d pers. sing. perf. of a Low L. _affid[=a]re_, to pledge
one's faith.]

AFFIED (_arch._), _pa.p._ of AFFY.

AFFILIATE, af-fil'i-[=a]t, _v.t._ to receive into a family as a son, or
into a society as a member: to attach to, or connect with, as minor
colleges with a university: to impute paternity to, to attribute to, to
father on or upon.--_n._ AFFILI[=A]'TION, the act of receiving into a
family or society as a member: (_law_) the assignment of an illegitimate
child to its father, the assignment of anything to its origin. [L.
_affili[=a]re_, to adopt--_ad_, to, _filius_, a son.]

AFFINE, af-f[=i]n', _n._ (_obs._) a relation, connection.--_adjs._ AFFINE',
AFFINED', related, bound by some tie. [O. Fr.--L. _affinis_,
neighbouring--_ad_, to, at, _finis_, a boundary.]

AFFINITY, af-fin'i-ti, _n._ nearness of kin, agreement, or resemblance:
causal relationship: structural resemblance between languages of ultimately
common origin: structural resemblance between plants, animals, or minerals
pointing to identity of stock: relationship by marriage, opposed to
consanguinity or relationship by blood: (_B._) social relationship: the
spiritual relationship between sponsors and their godchild: a mysterious
attraction supposed to exist between two persons: (_chem._) the peculiar
attraction between the atoms of two simple substances that makes them
combine to form a compound.--_adj._ AFFIN'ITIVE. [Fr.--L.
_affinitas_--_affinis_, neighbouring--_ad_, at, _finis_, boundary.]

AFFIRM, af-f[.e]rm', _v.t._ to assert confidently or positively: to ratify
a judgment: to confirm or maintain a statement of one's own or another's:
(_log._) to make a statement in the affirmative: (_law_) to make a formal
declaration or affirmation, without an oath.--_adj._ AFFIRM'ABLE, that may
be affirmed (with _of_).--_n._ AFFIRM'ANCE, affirmation, assertion,
confirmation.--_adj._ AFFIRM'ANT--also _n._, one who affirms.--_n._
AFFIRM[=A]'TION, act of asserting: that which is affirmed: (_law_) the
solemn declaration made by Quakers and others incapable of taking an
oath.--_adj._ and _n._ AFFIRM'ATIVE, that affirms or asserts: positive, not
negative: dogmatic.--_adv._ AFFIRM'ATIVELY.--_adj._ AFFIRM'ATORY. [O. Fr.
_afermer_--L. _affirm[=a]re_--_ad_, _firmus_, firm. See FIRM.]

AFFIX, af-fiks', _v.t._ to fix to: to add: to attach (_to_, _on_,
_upon_).--_n._ AF'FIX, an addition to a root, stem, or word, to modify its
meaning or use, whether _prefix_ or _suffix_: any appendage or addition.
[L. _affig[)e]re_, _-fixum_--_ad_, to, _fig[)e]re_, to fix. See FIX.]

AFFLATION, af-fl[=a]'shun, _n._ a breathing upon.--_p.adj._ AFFLAT'ED,
inspired. [From L. _affl[=a]re_, _fl[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, and _fl[=a]re_, to
breathe.]

AFFLATUS, af-fl[=a]'tus, _n._ inspiration, as of the poet or orator: esp.
religious inspiration, the divine afflatus = L. _afflatus divinus_. [See
INFLATION.]

AFFLICT, af-flikt', _v.t._ to give continued pain, distress, or grief: to
harass, or vex.--_pa.p._ AFFLICT'ED, harassed by disease of body or mind:
suffering.--_adj._ AFFLICT'ING, distressing.--_n._ AFFLIC'TION, state or
cause of pain or distress: misery: loss of friends, sickness, persecution.
&c.--_adj._ AFFLICT'IVE, causing distress. [L. _afflig[)e]re_,
_flictum_--_ad_, to, _flig[)e]re_, to dash to the ground.]

AFFLUENT, af'fl[=oo]-ent, _adj._ abounding: wealthy (with _in_).--_n._ a
stream flowing into a river or lake.--_ns._ AF'FLUENCE, abundance: wealth;
AF'FLUENCY (_obs._).--_adv._ AF'FLUENTLY.--_n._ AF'FLUENTNESS. [L.
_afflu[)e]re_, _affluent-em_--_ad_, to, _flu[)e]re_, to flow.]

AFFLUX, af'fluks, AFFLUXION, af-flux'shun, _n._ a flowing to: an accession.
[L. _afflu[)e]re_, _affluxum_. See AFFLUENT.]

AFFORCE, af-f[=o]rs', _v.t._ (_law_) to reinforce a jury or other
deliberative body by specially skilled persons.--_n._ AFFORCE'MENT. [O. Fr.
_aforcer_--Low L. _exforti[=a]re_--L. _fortis_, strong.]

AFFORD, af-f[=o]rd', _v.t._ to yield or produce: to be able to sell, to
expend, or to bear the expense of. [M. E. _aforthen_, from A.S.
_geforthian_ or _forthian_, to further or cause to come forth.]

AFFOREST, af-for'est, _v.t._ to turn land into forest.--_n._
AFFOREST[=A]'TION. [Low L. _afforest[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, and _foresta_.
See FOREST.]

AFFRANCHISE, af-fran'chiz, _v.t._ to free from slavery, or from some
obligation. [O. Fr. _afranchir_, _afranchiss-_, from _à_, to, _franchir_,
to free, _franc_, free. See FRANK.]

AFFRAP, af-frap', _v.t._ or _v.i._ (_Spens._) to strike or strike down.
[It. _affrappare_--_af_ (_ad_), to, and _frapp[=a]re_ (Fr. _frapper_), to
strike.]

AFFRAY, af-fr[=a]', _n._ a fight causing alarm: a brawl or fray: terror
(_Spens._).--_v.t._ to startle: to frighten: esp. in _pa.p._ AFFRAYED' =
afraid. [O. Fr. _afrayer_, _esfreer_ (Fr. _effrayer_)--Low L.
_exfredi[=a]re_, to break the king's peace--L. _ex_, and Old High Ger.
_fridu_ (Ger. _friede_), peace.]

AFFRET, af-fret', _n._ (_Spens._) a furious onset. [Prob. from It.
_affrettare_, to hasten.]

AFFRIENDED, af-frend'ed, _adj._ (_Spens._) made friends: reconciled.

AFFRIGHT, af-fr[=i]t', _v.t._ to frighten--also AFFRIGHT'EN.--_n._
AFFRIGHT', sudden terror.--_pa.p._ AFFRIGHT'ED, frightened.--_adv._
AFFRIGHT'EDLY.--_adj._ AFFRIGHT'FUL (_arch._).--_n._ AFFRIGHT'MENT, sudden
fear. [A.S. _afyrhtan_. See FRIGHT.]

AFFRONT, af-frunt', _v.t._ to meet face to face: to insult openly:
(_Shak._) to throw one's self in the way of.--_n._ contemptuous treatment:
an open insult: disgrace.--_adj._ AFFRONTÉ, _fem._ AFFRONTÉE, facing each
other: (_her._) of animals represented front to front, or expectant--opp.
to _Addorsed_; also looking frontwise, or toward the beholder.--_p.adj._
AFFRONT'ED, insulted, offended.--_adj._ AFFRONT'IVE.--TO PUT AN AFFRONT
UPON, TO OFFER AN AFFRONT TO = to openly insult a person. [O. Fr.
_afronter_--Low L. _affront[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _front-_, the forehead.]

AFFUSION, af-f[=u]'zhun, _n._ the act of pouring upon or
sprinkling.--Baptism by affusion is effected by the pouring of water on the
subject, as distinct from baptism by dipping, or baptism by sprinkling. [L.
_affusion-em_, _affund[)e]re_--_ad_, to, _fund[)e]re_, _fusum_, to pour.]

AFFY, af-f[=i]', _v.t._ (_obs._) to pledge one's faith to, to
betroth.--_v.i._ to trust or confide:--_pr.p._ affy'ing; _pa.p._
aff[=i]ed'. [O. Fr. _afier_--Low L. _aff[=i]d[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _fides_,
faith. See AFFIANCE.]

AFIELD, a-f[=e]ld', _adv._ to, in, or on the field.

AFIRE, a-f[=i]r', _adv._ on fire: in a state of inflammation.

AFLAME, a-fl[=a]m', _adj._ and _adv._ flaming: glowing. [Pfx. _a-_, and
FLAME.]

AFLOAT, a-fl[=o]t', _adv._ or _adj._ floating: at sea: unfixed: in
circulation.

AFOOT, a-foot', _adv._ on foot: astir.

AFORE, a-f[=o]r', _prep._ (_B._ and _Shak._) beforehand, previously.

AFOREHAND, a-f[=o]r'hand, _adv._ before the regular time of accomplishment:
in advance.

AFORESAID, a-f[=o]r'sed, _adj._ said or named before.

AFORETHOUGHT, a-f[=o]r'thawt, _adj._ thought of or meditated before:
premeditated.

AFORETIME, a-f[=o]r't[=i]m, _adv._ in former or past times.

AFOUL, a-fowl', _adj._ or _adv._ entangled: in collision (with _of_).

AFRAID, a-fr[=a]d', _adj._ struck with fear: timid. [See AFFRAY.]

AFRESH, a-fresh', _adv._ anew.

AFRICAN, af'rik-an, _adj._ pertaining to Africa--also AF'RIC.--_ns._
AF'RICAN, a native of Africa; AFRICAND'ER, one born of white parents in
Cape Colony or other parts of South Africa. [L. _Africus_,
_Africanus_--_Afer_, African.]

AFRIT, a-frit', _n._ an evil demon in Arabian mythology.--Also AFREET'.
[Ar. _`ifr[=i]t_, a demon.]

AFRONT, a-frunt', _adv._ (_obs._) in front.

AFT, aft, _adj._ or _adv._ behind: near or towards the stern of a vessel.
[A.S. _æft-an_.]

AFTER, aft'[.e]r, _prep._ and _adv._ behind in place: later in time:
following in search of: in imitation of: in proportion to, or in agreement
with: concerning: subsequent to, or subsequently: afterward: after the
manner of, or in imitation of.--_adj._ behind in place: later in time: more
toward the stern of a vessel. [A.S. _æfter_, comp. of _af_, or _of_, the
primary meaning being 'more off,' 'farther away;' _-ter_ as a comparative
affix is seen in L. _al-ter_, Eng. _o-ther_. See OF.]

AFTERBIRTH, aft'[.e]r-b[.e]rth, _n._ the placenta and membranes which are
expelled from the uterus of the mother after the birth.

AFTERCLAP, aft'[.e]r-klap, _n._ an unexpected event happening after an
affair is supposed to be at an end.

AFTERCROP, aft'[.e]r-krop, _n._ a second crop in the same year.

AFTER-DAMP, aft'[.e]r-damp, _n._ choke-damp, arising in coal-mines after an
explosion of fire-damp.

AFTEREYE, aft-[.e]r-[=i]', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to look after.

AFTERGAME, aft'[.e]r-g[=a]m, _n._ a second game played to reverse the issue
of the first, hence the means employed after the first turn of affairs.

AFTERGLOW, aft'[.e]r-gl[=o], _n._ the glow often seen in the sky after
sunset.

AFTERGUARD, aft'[.e]r-gärd, _n._ the men on the quarter-deck and poop who
work the after sails, not needing to go aloft: a drudge or person in a mean
capacity.

AFTER-HANDS, af'ter-handz, _n.pl._ (_Tenn._) future labourers.

AFTER-IMAGE, aft'[.e]r-im'[=a]j, _n._ the image that remains for a brief
period after the eye has been withdrawn from the object.

AFTERINGS, aft'[.e]r-ingz, _n._ the last milk drawn in milking.

AFTERMATH, aft'[.e]r-math, _n._ a second mowing of grass in the same
season. [See MOW, MEADOW.]

AFTERMOST, aft'[.e]r-m[=o]st, _adj._ hindmost. [A.S. _æftemest_; Goth.
_af-tuma_, _-tuma_, being equiv. to L. _-tumus_ in _op-tumus_, best. Goth.
has also _af-tum-ists_ = A.S. _æf-tem-est_, which is thus a double
superlative.--Thus in aftermost, _r_ is intrusive and _-most_ is not the
adv. _most_.]

AFTERNOON, aft'[.e]r-n[=oo]n, _n._ the time between noon and evening.--_n._
AFT'ER-MORN (_Tenn._), the morrow.

AFTERPAINS, aft'[.e]r-p[=a]nz, _n._ the pains which succeed childbirth and
the expulsion of the afterbirth.

AFTERPIECE, aft'[.e]r-p[=e]s, _n._ a farce or other minor piece performed
after a play.

AFTERSUPPER, aft'[.e]r-sup-p[.e]r, _n._ the time between supper and
bedtime.

AFTERTHOUGHT, aft'[.e]r-thawt, _n._ thought or reflection after an action:
a later thought.

AFTERWARD, aft'[.e]r-ward, AFTERWARDS, aft'[.e]r-wardz, _adv._ in
after-time: later: subsequently. [A.S. _æftenweard_.]

AGA, AGHA, [=a]'ga, _n._ a Turkish commander or chief officer. [Turk.
_agh[=a]_, Pers. _ak_, _aka_, a lord.]

AGAIN, a-gen', _adv._ once more: in return: back. [A.S. _on-geán_, again,
opposite; Ger. _ent-gegen_.]

AGAINST, a-genst', also a-g[=a]nst', _prep._ opposite to: in opposition to:
in contact or collision with: in provision for: in exchange for, instead
of: (_B._ and _Shak._) by the time that, elliptically for 'against (the
time) at which' or 'that I come.' [Formed from _again_, with genitive
ending _-es_, as _whilst_ from _while_--the _-t_ being a later addition, as
in _amongs-t_, _amids-t_, &c.]

AGAMI, ag'a-mi, _n._ the golden-breasted trumpeter, a grallatorial bird of
South America. [Native name.]

AGAMOGENESIS, a-gam-o-jen'e-sis, _n._ reproduction without sex, found among
lower animals and in plants. [Gr. _a_, priv., _gamos_, marriage, _genesis_,
reproduction.]

AGAMOUS, ag'a-mus, _adj._ (_bot._) having no visible flowers or organs of
fructification. [Gr. _agamos_--_a_, neg., and _gamos_, marriage.]

AGAPE, ag'a-p[=e], _n._ a love-feast, held by the early Christians at
communion time, when contributions were made for the poor:--_pl._
AG'APÆ.--_n._ AGAPEM'ON[=E] (Gr., 'love abode'), a community of religious
visionaries with unedifying ideas about the sexual relations, founded in
1859 at Charlinch, near Bridgwater, by one H. J. Prince, formerly an
Anglican clergyman. [Gr. _agap[=e]_, love.]

AGAPE, a-g[=a]p', _adj._ or _adv._ gaping from wonder, expectation, or
attention. [Lit., 'on gape.']

AGARIC, ag'ar-ik, _n._ a family of fungi, including the mushroom. [Gr.
_agarikon_.]

AGASTRIC, a-gas'trik, _adj._ having no stomach. [Gr. _a_, neg., and
_gast[=e]r_, stomach.]

AGATE, ag'[=a]t, _n._ a precious stone composed of layers of quartz, of
different tints.--_adj._ AGATIF'EROUS. [Gr. _achat[=e]s_, said to be so
called because first found near the river _Achates_ in Sicily.]

AGATE, a-g[=a]t', _adv._ agoing, on the way. [Prep. _a_, and GATE; a
northern word.]

AGAVE, a-g[=a]'ve, _n._ a genus of herbaceous plants, natives of the warmer
parts of America, which in Mexico usually flower about the seventh or
eighth year, the stem rising to a height of forty feet. It is called also
the American Aloe and Century Plant, receiving the latter name from the
number of years (40-60, popularly a hundred) it takes to flower in our
hot-houses.

AGAZED, a-g[=a]zd', _adj._ (_Shak._) struck with amazement. [Prob. a
variant of AGHAST.]

AGE, [=a]j, _n._ the ordinary length of human life: the time during which a
person or thing has lived or existed: mature years: legal maturity (at 21
years), or time of life with regard to crime, contracts, marriage, &c.: a
period of time: any great period of human history, as the Golden Age, the
Bronze Age, the Middle Ages, or of individual history, as the age of
infancy, the five--or seven--so-called ages of man: a generation of men: a
century.--_v.i._ to grow old:--_pr.p._ [=a]g'ing; _pa.p._ [=a]g'ed.--_adj._
AGED ([=a]j'ed), advanced in age: having a certain age.--_n.pl._ old
people.--_n._ AGEDNESS ([=a]j'ed-nes), condition of being aged or
old.--_adjs._ AGE'LESS; AGE'LONG. [O. Fr. _edage_ (Fr. _âge_)--L. _ætas_ =
_ævitas_--L. _ævum_, age; cog. with EVER.]

AGEN, a-gen', _adv._ Same as AGAIN.

AGENDA, aj-end'a, _n._ things to be done: a memorandum-book: (_obs._) a
ritual. [L. _agendus_, fut. perf. pass. of _ag[)e]re_, to do.]

AGENT, [=a]j'ent, _n._ a person or thing that acts or exerts power: any
natural force acting on matter: one authorised or delegated to transact
business for another.--_n._ AG'ENCY, the office or business, operation or
action, of an agent; instrumentality.--LAW AGENT, a general term in
Scotland, including Writers to the Signet, Solicitors to the Supreme Court,
and Procurators in the sheriff courts--the requirements are an indentured
apprenticeship of five years to a law agent, the passing of examinations in
general knowledge and in law, and formal admission by the Court of Session.
[L. _ag[)e]re_, to do. See ACT.]

AGGLOMERATE, ag-glom'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make into a ball: to collect
into a mass.--_v.i._ to grow into a mass.--_adjs._ AGGLOM'ERATE,
AGGLOM'ERATED, collected into a heap or mass.--_n._ AGGLOMER[=A]'TION, a
growing or heaping together: a mass: a cluster.--_adj._ AGGLOM'ERATIVE.
[_Agglomer[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, L. _glomus_, _glomeris_, a ball.
See CLEW, GLOBE.]

AGGLUTINATE, ag-gl[=oo]t'in-[=a]t, _v.t._ to cause to adhere by glue or
cement.--_adj._ AGGLUT'INANT, uniting or causing to stick together.--_ns._
AGGLUT'INATE, AGGLUT'INATIVE, a classification formerly much used in
contrast to _inflectional_, to describe such languages as Turkish, which
show, in the words of Whitney, an inferior degree of integration in the
elements of their words, or of unification of words, the suffixes and
prefixes retaining a certain independence of one another and of the root or
stem to which they are added; AGGLUTIN[=A]'TION, the act of uniting, as by
glue: adhesion of parts.--_adj._ AGGLUT'INATIVE, tending to or having power
to cause adhesion. [L. _agglutin[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _gluten_, glue. See
GLUE.]

AGGRACE, ag-gr[=a]s', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to grace, to favour.--_n._
kindness: favour. [Low L. _aggrati[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _gratia_, grace.]

AGGRANDISE, ag'grand-[=i]z, _v.t._ to make great or larger: to make greater
in power, rank, or honour.--_ns._ AGGRANDIS[=A]'TION; AGGRANDISEMENT
(ag'grand-[=i]z-ment, or ag-grand'iz-ment), act of aggrandising: state of
being aggrandised. [Fr., from L. _ad_, to, and _grandis_, large.]

AGGRATE, ag-gr[=a]t', _v.t._ (_obs._) to gratify or please. [It.
_aggratare_--L. _ad_, to, _gratus_, pleasing. See GRACE.]

AGGRAVATE, ag'grav-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make worse: to provoke.--_adj._
AG'GRAVATING.--_adv._ AG'GRAVATINGLY.--_n._ AGGRAV[=A]'TION, a making
worse: any quality or circumstance which makes a thing worse: an
exaggeration. [L. _aggrav[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _gravis_, heavy. See GRAVE.]

AGGREGATE, ag'greg-[=a]t, _v.t._ to collect into a mass: to
accumulate.--_v.i._ (_rare_) to add as a member to a society: to combine
with.--_adj._ formed of parts taken together.--_n._ the sum total.--_adv._
AG'GREGATELY.--_n._ AGGREG[=A]'TION, act of aggregating: state of being
collected together: an aggregate.--_adj._ AG'GREGATIVE. [L. _aggreg[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_, to bring together, as a flock--_ad_, to, _grex_, _gregis_, a
flock.]

AGGRESS, ag-gres', _v.i._ to make a first attack: to begin a quarrel: to
intrude.--_adj._ AGGRESS'IVE, making the first attack, or prone to do so:
offensive as opposed to defensive.--_ns._ AGGRESS'IVENESS; AGGRESS'OR, one
who attacks first. [L. _aggredi_, _-gressus_--_ad_, to, _gradi_, to step.]

AGGRESSION, ag-gresh'un, _n._ first act of hostility or injury: a breach of
the peace: an attack on public privileges. [L. _aggredi_, _-gressus_--_ad_,
to, _gradi_, to step.]

AGGRIEVE, ag-gr[=e]v', _v.t._ to press heavily upon: to pain or injure. [O.
Fr. _agrever_ (Sp. _agraviar_)--L. _ad_, to, and _gravis_, heavy. See
GRIEF, GRIEVE.]

AGHAST, a-gast', _adj._ stupefied with horror. [Properly _agast_; M. E.
_agasten_, to terrify; A.S. intens. pfx. _á-_, and _gæstan_, to terrify.
The primary notion of the root _gæs-_ (Goth. _gais-_) is to fix, stick; to
root to the spot with terror. See GAZE.]

AGILE, aj'il, _adj._ active: nimble.--_n._ AGIL'ITY, quickness of motion:
nimbleness--also AG'ILENESS. [Fr.--L. _agilis_--_ag[)e]re_, to do or act.]

AGIO, [=a]'ji-o, _n._ the difference between the real and nominal value of
money, or between metallic and paper money: the variations from fixed pars
or rates of exchange: discount. [It. _agio_, _aggio_, ease, convenience.]

AGIOTAGE, aj'i-o-t[=a]j, _n._ exchange business, hence the manoeuvres of
speculators to raise or depress the funds: stock-jobbing.

AGIST, a-jist', _v.t._ to take in the cattle of others to graze for a
certain sum: to charge lands or the like with any public burden.--_ns._
AGIST'MENT, the action of agisting: the price paid for cattle pasturing on
the land: a burden or tax; AGIST'OR, AGIST'ER, an officer who takes charge
of cattle agisted. [O. Fr. _agister_--L. _jacit[=a]re_, _jac[=e]re_, to
lie.]

AGITATE, aj'i-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to keep moving: to stir violently: to disturb:
to discuss, or keep up the discussion of a question.--_n._ AGIT[=A]'TION,
commotion: perturbation of mind: discussion: public excitement.--_adj._
AG'ITATIVE.--_n._ AG'ITATOR, one who excites or keeps up a public
agitation. [L. _agit[=a]re_, freq. of _ag[)e]re_, to put in motion. See
ACT.]

AGLET, AIGLET, [=a]'glet, _n._ the tag or point of the lace or string by
which different parts of dress were fastened together, orig. to facilitate
passing through the eyelet-holes, afterwards themselves ornamental, like
Shakespeare's _aglet-baby_, and still surviving in the so-called
_aiguillettes_ or tagged points of braid hanging from the shoulder in some
military and naval uniforms: a technical name for white stay-laces. [Fr.
_aiguillette_, dim. of _aiguille_, a needle--from L. _acucula_ = _acicula_,
dim. of _acus_, a needle.]

AGLEY, AGLEE, a-gl[=e]', _adv._ (_Scot._) off the right line: wrong. [Pfx.
_a-_, and Scot. _gley_, _gleg_, squint.]

AGLIMMER, a-glim'[.e]r, _adv._ in a glimmering state.

AGLOW, a-gl[=o]', _adj._ and _adv._ very warm: red-hot.

AGNAIL, ag'n[=a]l, _n._ an inflammation round the toe- or finger-nail: a
whitlow: a hangnail. [A.S. _angnægl_--_ang_, tight, and _nægl_, a nail;
confounded in meaning by the dictionary-makers with Fr. _angonailles_,
blotches, sores--Low L. _anguinalia_, carbuncles.]

AGNAME, ag'n[=a]m, _n._ a name over and above the name and surname.--_adj._
AG'NAMED, styled by such a name. [L. _ag_ = _ad_, and NAME; formed after L.
_agnomen_.]

AGNATE, ag'n[=a]t, _adj._ related on the father's side: allied.--_n._ a
relation by the father's side.--_adjs._ AGNAT'IC, AGNAT'ICAL.--_adv._
AGNAT'ICALLY.--_n._ AGN[=A]'TION. [L. _agnat-us_--_ad_, to, _nasci_, to be
born. See COGNATE.]

AGNISE, ag-n[=i]z', _v.t._ (_arch._) to acknowledge, to confess. [L.
_agnosc[)e]re_--_ad_, to, _gnosc[)e]re_, _nosc[)e]re_, to know.]

AGNOMEN, ag-n[=o]'men, _n._ a surname added to the family name, generally
on account of some great exploit, as _Africanus_ to P. Cornelius Scipio.
[L.--_ad_, to, and _gnomen_, _nomen_, a name.]

AGNOSTIC, ag-nos'tik, _n._ one who holds that we know nothing of things
beyond material phenomena--that a First Cause and an unseen world are
things unknown and apparently unknowable.--_n._ AGNOS'TICISM. [Coined by
Prof. Huxley in 1869 from the word in Acts, xvii. 23; _a_, privative, and
Gr. _gn[=o]stikos_, good at knowing. See GNOSTIC.]

AGNUS DEI, ag'nus-d[=e]'[=i], a part of the Mass beginning with the words
_Agnus Dei_, also the music set to it: a figure of a lamb emblematic of
Christ, bearing with its right foot the banner of the cross, and having the
nimbus inscribed with the cross around its head: a round cake of wax
stamped with such a figure, and blessed by the Pope. [L., lit. 'lamb of
God.']

AGO, a-g[=o]', AGONE, a-gon', _adv._ gone: past: since. [Pa.p. of A.S.
_[=a]g[=a]n_, to pass away--inten. pfx. _[=a]-_, and _g[=a]n_, to go.]

AGOG, a-gog', _adj._ or _adv._ eager: astir. [Perh. connected with O. Fr.
_en gogues_; _estre en ses gogues_, to be frolicsome, or Fr. _vivre à
gogo_, to live in abundance. The ultimate origin is unknown.]

AGOING, a-g[=o]'ing, _adv._ going on: current.

AGONE. See AGO.

AGONIC, ag'on-ik, _adj._ having or making no angle.--AGONIC LINE, the line
of no magnetic variation--an irregular line passing through the magnetic
poles of the earth, along which the magnetic needle points directly north
or south. [Gr. _ag[=o]nos_; _a_, neg., _g[=o]nia_, angle.]

AGONIST, ag'o-nist, _n._ one who contends for a prize in public
games.--_adjs._ AGONIST'IC, -AL, relating to athletic contests:
combative.--_adv._ AGONIST'ICALLY.--_n._ AGONIST'ICS, the art and theory of
games and prize-fighting. [See AGONY.]

AGONY, ag'o-ni, _n._ a violent struggle: extreme suffering: the death
struggle in particular: Christ's anguish in Gethsemane.--_v.t._ AG'ONISE,
to struggle, suffer agony: to subject to agony.--_adj._ AG'ONISING, causing
agony.--_adv._ AG'ONISINGLY.--AGONY COLUMN, the part of a newspaper
containing special advertisements, as for missing friends and the like.
[Gr.--_ag[=o]n_, contest.]

AGOOD, a-good', _adv._ (_obs._) in good earnest, heartily. [A.S. pfx. _a-_,
and GOOD.]

AGORA, ag'o-ra, _n._ an assembly, hence a place of assembly, the
market-place. [Gr.]

AGOUTA, a-g[=oo]'ta, _n._ a rat-like animal of Hayti.

AGOUTI, a-g[=oo]'ti, _n._ a small South American rodent allied to the
guinea-pig. [Native word.]

AGRAFFE, a-graf', _n._ a kind of clasp or hook. [Fr. _agrafe_, a clasp--Low
L. _grappa_, Old High Ger. _chrapfo_ (Ger. _krappen_), a hook.]

AGRARIAN, ag-r[=a]'ri-an, _adj._ relating to land, or its management, as in
'agrarian crime,' &c., applied esp. to Roman laws for the equal
distribution of the public lands: rural.--_n._ AGR[=A]'RIANISM, an equal
division of lands: a political movement in favour of interference with the
ordinary conditions of private property in land. [L. _agrarius_--_ager_, a
field. See ACRE.]

AGREE, a-gr[=e]', _v.i._ to be of one mind: to concur: to assent to: to be
consistent, to harmonise: to determine, to settle: to resemble, to suit:
(_gram._) to be in concord with--taking the same gender, number, case, or
person: to do well with climate, &c. (followed by _with_ before the person
or thing agreeing: by _upon_, _on_, _for_, _to_, _in_ before the condition
of the agreement):--_pa.p._ agreed'.--_adj._ AGREE'ABLE, suitable:
pleasant: favourable to, consenting to.--_n._ AGREE'ABLENESS, suitableness:
conformity: quality of pleasing--also AGREEABIL'ITY.--_adv._
AGREE'ABLY.--_n._ AGREE'MENT, concord: conformity: harmony: a bargain or
contract. [O. Fr. _agréer_, to accept kindly--L. _ad_, to, and _gratus_,
pleasing.]

AGRESTIC, a-gres'tik, _adj._ pertaining to the fields: rural: unpolished.
[L. _agrestis_--_ager_, a field.]

AGRICULTURE, ag'ri-kult-[=u]r, _n._ the art or practice of cultivating the
land.--_adj._ AGRICULT'URAL, relating to agriculture.--_n._ AGRICULT'URIST,
one skilled in agriculture: a farmer--also AGRICULT'URALIST. [L.
_agricultura_--_ager_, a field, _cultura_, cultivation. See CULTURE.]

AGRIMONY, ag'ri-mun-i, _n._ a genus of plants of the rose-group, with small
yellow flowers and bitter taste. [L. _agrimonia_, for _argemonia_, Gr.
_argem[=o]n[=e]_.]

AGRIN, a-grin', _adv._ on the grin.

AGRISE, a-gr[=i]z', _v.t._ (_obs._) to terrify, to make frightful. [A.S.
_[=a]gr[=i]san_, to dread.]

AGRONOMIAL, ag-r[=o]-n[=o]'mi-al, _adj._ relating to the management of
farms--also AGRONOM'IC.--_n._ AGRON'OMY, agricultural pursuits. [Gr.
_agronomos_; _agros_, a field, _nemein_, to deal out.]

AGROUND, a-grownd', _adv._ stranded.

AGUARDIENTE, a-gwär-di-[.e]n't[.e], _n._ a kind of grape-brandy made in
Spain and Portugal: any spirituous liquor, applied even to Mexican pulque.
[Sp., from _agua ardiente_, burning water; _agua_--L. _aqua_; _ardiente_,
_arder_--L. _ard[=e]re_, to burn.]

AGUE, [=a]'g[=u], _n._ a fever coming in periodical fits, accompanied with
shivering: chilliness: quaking.--_adj._ A'GUED, struck with ague:
shivering: cold; A'GUISH. [O. Fr. _aigue_ (Fr. _aigu_, sharp)--L. _acutus_.
See ACUTE.]

AGUERRIED, a-ger'id, _adj._ inured to war, or instructed in it. [Fr.
_aguerrir_, to make warlike; _à_--Lat. _ad_, to, and _guerre_, war.]

AGUISE, a-g[=i]z', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to dress, to adorn. [Pfx. _a-_, and
GUISE.]

AH, ä, _interj._ an exclamation of surprise, joy, pity, complaint, &c.

AHA, ä-hä', _interj._ an exclamation of exultation, pleasure, surprise, or
contempt.

AHEAD, a-hed', _adv._ farther on: in advance: headlong, as in the phrase
'to go _ahead_.'

AHEAP, a-h[=e]p', _adv._ in a heap: in a state of collapse through terror
or astonishment.

AHEIGHT, a-h[=i]t', _adv._ (_arch._) on high, aloft.

AHEM, a-hem', _interj._ a lengthened form of HEM.

AHITHOPHEL. See ACHITOPHEL.

AHIGH, a-h[=i]', _adv._ an obsolete form of ON HIGH.

AHOLD, a-h[=o]ld', _adv._ (_Shak._) near the wind, so as to keep clear of
the land.

AHORSEBACK, a-hors'bak, _adv._ on horseback.

AHOY, a-hoi', _interj._ a nautical term used in hailing. [Form of interj.
HOY.]

AHULL, a-hul', _adv._ (_naut._) with sails furled, and helm lashed to the
lee-side, driving before the wind, stern foremost.

AHUNGERED, a-hung'g[.e]rd, _adj._ oppressed with hunger. [Erroneously
written AN HUNGERED, as in Bible.]

AIBLINS, [=a]b'linz, _adv._ (_Scot._) perhaps, possibly. [See ABLE.]

AID, [=a]d, _v.t._ to help, assist.--_n._ help: assistance, as in defending
an action: an auxiliary: subsidy or money grant to the king.--_n._
AID'ANCE, aid, help, support.--_adj._ AID'ANT, (_arch._) aiding,
helping.--_n._ AID'ER, one who brings aid: a helper.--_adjs._ AID'FUL;
AID'LESS.--COURT OF AIDS, the court that supervised the customs duties. [O.
Fr. _aider_--L. _adjut[=a]re_--_ad_, and _juv[=a]re_, _jutum_, to help.]

AIDE-DE-CAMP, [=a]d'-de-kong, _n._ an officer who carries the orders of a
general on the field, and brings him intelligence:--_pl._ AIDES'-DE-CAMP.
[Fr., assistant on the field.]

AIERY, a variant of AERIE.

AIGRETTE, [=a]'gret, _n._ (_zool._) a small white heron: (_bot._) the down
attached to vegetable seeds, as in the thistle: a plume composed of
feathers, or of precious stones, like a heron's crest. [Fr. _aigrette_.]

AIGUILLE, [=a]-gw[=e]l', _n._ a sharp, needle-like peak of rock, applied
esp. to many of the peaks near Mont Blanc: a slender boring-drill for
blasting. [Fr. See AGLET.]

AIGUILLETTE. See AGLET.

AIL, [=a]l, _v.i._ to feel pain: to be in trouble.--_v.t._ to trouble,
afflict--_obs._ except in impers. phrase 'What ails you?'--_n._ trouble:
indisposition.--_n._ AIL'MENT, pain: indisposition: disease. [A.S. _eglan_,
to pain. See AWE.]

AILANTO, [=e]l-an'to, _n._ a lofty and beautiful tree, native to
South-eastern Asia, but grown to shade public walks in France and Italy.
Its leaves give food to a species of silkworm--it is sometimes called the
Vernis du Japon, or Japan Varnish, apparently by confusion with certain
species of Rhus.--Also AILAN'TUS. [Native Amboyna name, meaning 'tree of
the gods.']

AILETTE, [=a]l-let', _n._ an iron plate once worn by men-at-arms for
defence on the shoulder. [Fr., dim. of _aille_--L. _ala_, a wing.]

AIM, [=a]m, _v.i._ to point at with a weapon: to direct the intention or
endeavour (_at_): (_obs._) to conjecture.--_v.t._ to point, as a weapon or
firearm.--_n._ the pointing of a weapon: the thing pointed at: design:
intention.--_adj._ AIM'LESS, without aim.--_adv._ AIM'LESSLY.--_n._
AIM'WORTHINESS, good aim.--TO CRY AIM, in old writers, to encourage archers
when shooting by crying 'aim,' hence to applaud or encourage. [O. Fr.
_esmer_, to reckon--L. _æstim[=a]re_, to estimate. See ESTIMATE.]

AIN'T, [=a]nt, a colloquial contracted form of _are not_--also AN'T =
_aren't_, _are not_.--AN'T (_Shak._) occurs as a variant of _on't_ = _on
it_, _of it_.

AIR, [=a]r, _n._ the fluid we breathe: the atmosphere: any special
condition of atmosphere, as in 'the night-_air_,' 'to take the air:' a
light breeze: publicity: the bearing of a person: outward appearance,
manner, look: an assumed or affected manner: (_mus._) a rhythmical melody:
a song, also specially a sprightly song: the soprano part in a harmonised
composition, being that which gives it its character: (_pl._)
affectation.--_v.t._ to expose to the air: to dry: to expose to warm air:
(_obs._) to take an airing.--_ns._ AIR'-BATH, an arrangement for drying
substances in air of any desired temperature; AIR'-BED, a bed for the sick,
inflated with air; AIR'-BLAD'DER, in some fishes, an organ containing air,
by which they maintain their equilibrium in the water; AIR'-BRAKE, a
railway brake worked by compressed air.--_adj._ AIR'-BUILT, built in air:
having no solid foundation.--_ns._ AIR'-CELL, a cavity containing air;
AIR'-CUSH'ION, an air-tight cushion, which can be inflated; AIR'-DRAIN, an
ample space at the foot of foundation walls, for the sake of
dryness.--_adj._ AIR'DRAWN, drawn in air: visionary: (_Shak._)
imaginary.--_ns._ AIR'-EN'GINE, an engine put in motion by air expanded by
heat; AIR'-GAS, illuminating gas made by charging atmospheric air with
vapour of petroleum or other hydrocarbon; AIR'-GUN, a gun which discharges
bullets by means of compressed air.--_adv._ AIR'ILY, gaily.--_ns._
AIR'INESS, state of being airy; openness: liveliness; AIR'ING, exposure to
the air or fire: a short excursion in the open air; AIR'-JACK'ET, a jacket
with air-tight cavities, which being inflated renders a person buoyant in
water.--_adj._ AIR'LESS, void of air: not having free communication with
the open air.--_ns._ AIR'-LOCK, a small chamber for the entrance and exit
of men and materials, at the top of the caisson or hollow cylinder used for
founding the piers of bridges under water; AIR'-PUMP, an instrument for
pumping the air out of a vessel; AIR'-SAC, an air-cell or air-space, esp.
in the bones of birds; AIR'-SHAFT, a passage for air into a mine;
AIR'-SHIP, a navigable balloon; AIR'-SPACE, the cubic content of a room,
hospital-ward, or the like, with reference to the respirable air contained
in it.--_adj._ AIR'-TIGHT, so tight as not to admit air.--_n._
AIR'-VES'SEL, a vessel or tube containing air.--_adv._ AIR'WARDS, up in the
air.--_adj._ AIR'Y, consisting of or relating to air: open to the air: like
air: unsubstantial: light of heart: sprightly.--TO TAKE AIR, to get wind,
to become publicly known. [Fr.--L. _aër_--Gr.]

AIRLING, [=a]r'ling, _n._ (_obs._) a thoughtless, gay person.

AIRT, [=a]rt, _n._ (_Scot._) direction, quarter. [Gael. _aird_, _àrd_; Ir.
_ard_.]

AISLE, [=i]l, _n._ any lateral division of any part of a church, whether of
nave, choir, or transept. The word is often erroneously applied to the
passage in a church between the pews or seats.--_adj._ AISLED, ([=i]ld),
having aisles. [O. Fr. _ele_, _aisle_ (Fr. _aile_)--L. _axilla_, _ala_, a
wing.]

AIT, [=a]t, _n._ a small island in a river or lake. [A.S. forms, _íget_,
_ígeoth_, supply the key to the word, but its history is obscure.]

AITCHBONE, [=a]ch'b[=o]n, _n._ the bone of the rump: the cut of beef over
this bone. [Orig. _nache-_ or _nage_bone; O. Fr. _nache_, _nage_--L.
_nates_, buttock; _a nache_ became _aitch_, and erroneously _edge_-bone.]

AJAR, a-jär', _adv._ partly open. [A.S. _on_, on, _cyrr_, a turn.]

AJEE, AGEE, a-j[=e]', _adv._ (_Scot._ and _prov._) aside, off the straight,
ajar. [Prep. _a_, and _gee_, to move to one side; _jee_, a call to a horse
to move to one side.]

AJUTAGE, ADJUTAGE, ad'joo-t[=a]j, _n._ a tube adjusted to an orifice
through which water is discharged. [Fr.--Fr. _ajouter_. See ADJUST.]

AKE, [=a]k, old form of ACHE.

AKEE, a-k[=e]', _n._ the fruit of a small African sapindaceous tree, now
common in the West Indies.

AKIMBO, a-kim'bo, _adj._ with hand on hip and elbow bent outward. [Ety.
uncertain; Skeat suggests the Ice. _kengboginn_, bent into a crook, from
_kengr_, a crook, twist, kink, and _boginn_, bowed. Others connect the
_-kim_ with KEEN.]

AKIN, a-kin', _adj._ of kin: related by blood: having the same properties.
[OF and KIN.]

ALABASTER, al'a-bas-t[.e]r, _n._ a semi-transparent kind of gypsum or
sulphate of lime: the fine limestone deposited as stalagmites and
stalactites.--_adj._ made of alabaster.--_adj._ ALABAS'TRIAN. [Gr.
_alabastros_, said to be derived from _Alabastron_, a town in Egypt.]

ALACK, a-lak', _interj._ an exclamation denoting sorrow.

ALACK-A-DAY, a-lak'-a-d[=a], _interj._ (_rare_) an exclamation of sadness.
[Interj. _ah_, _lak_ (LACK), and DAY.]

ALACRITY, a-lak'ri-ti, _n._ briskness: cheerful readiness: promptitude. [L.
_alacris_, brisk.]

ALALIA, a-l[=a]'li-a, _n._ loss of speech. [Gr. _a_, priv., and _lalein_,
to talk.]

ALAMEDA, a-la-m[=e]'da, _n._ a public walk or promenade between two rows of
trees. [Sp.]

ALAMODE, a-la-m[=o]d', _adv._ and _adj._ according to the mode or
fashion.--_n._ a light kind of glossy silk for scarfs, hat-bands, &c.--_n._
ALAMODAL'ITY (_rare_).--ALAMODE BEEF, beef larded and stewed with
vegetables. [Fr. _à la mode_.]

ALAMORT, a-la-mort', _adj._ half-dead: in a depressed condition: dejected.
Sometimes erroneously ALL AMORT. [Fr. _à la mort_, to death. See MORTAL.]

ALAND, a-land', _adv._ on or to land: landed.

ALAR, [=a]'lar, _adj._ of, or having, wings.--Also A'LARY. [L. _ala_, a
wing.]

ALARM, a-lärm', _n._ notice of danger: sudden surprise with fear: a
mechanical contrivance to arouse from sleep: a call to arms.--_v.t._ to
call to arms: to give notice of danger: to fill with dread.--_adv._
ALARM'INGLY.--_n._ ALARM'IST, one who excites alarm: one given to prophesy
danger.--_adj._ alarming. [Fr. _alarme_--It. _all' arme_, to arms--L. _ad_,
to, _arma_, arms.]

ALARUM, al-är'um, _n._ and _v.t._ same as ALARM--now used, except
poetically, only of an _alarum-clock_.

ALAS, a-las', _interj._ expressive of grief.--ALAS THE DAY, ALAS THE WHILE
(in old writers), ah! unhappy day, or time. [O. Fr. _ha las_, _a las_ (mod.
Fr. _hélas_); _ha!_ and _las_, _lasse_, wretched, weary--L. _lassus_,
wearied.]

ALATE, a-l[=a]t', _adv._ (_arch._) lately. [A.S. pfx. _a-_, on, and LATE.]

ALATE, al'[=a]t, _adj._ winged: (_bot._) bordered by a leafy
expansion.--Also AL'ATED. [L. _alatus_--_ala_, a wing.]

ALB, alb, _n._ in R.C. churches, a white linen vestment with tight sleeves,
reaching to the feet, worn by the officiating priest at the celebration of
the eucharist, under the chasuble, cope, or dalmatic. [A.S. _albe_--Low L.
_alba_, L. _albus_, white.]

ALBACORE, al'ba-k[=o]r, _n._ a large species of the tunny fish, found in
West Indian waters. [Port.--Ar. _al_, the, _bukr_, pl. _bak[=a]rat_, a
young camel.]

ALBATA, al-b[=a]'ta, _n._ a white silvery alloy of nickel, zinc, and
copper--also _British plate_ and _German Silver_. [L., _alb[=a]re_, to
whiten, _albus_, white.]

ALBATROSS, al'ba-tros, _n._ a large, long-winged, web-footed sea-bird of
remarkable powers of flight, found abundantly in the Southern Ocean,
particularly near the Cape of Good Hope. [Corr. from ALCATRAS (q.v.), perh.
with reference to _albus_, white, from its colour.]

ALBE, ALE-BE, awl-b[=e]', _obs._ forms of ALBEIT.

ALBEIT, awl-b[=e]'it, _adv._ although it be: notwithstanding: even if,
although. [All be it (that) = all though it be that]

ALBERT, al'bert, _n._ a short kind of watch-chain. [Named from Prince
_Albert_, husband of Queen Victoria.]

ALBESCENT, al-bes'ent, _adj._ becoming white: whitish.--_n._ ALBES'CENCE.
[L. _albescens_, -_entis_, pr.p. of _albesc[)e]re_, to grow white--_albus_,
white.]

ALBESPYNE, ALBESPINE, al'be-sp[=i]n, _n._ whitethorn, hawthorn. [O. Fr.
_albespine_, _aubespine_ (Fr. _aubépine_)--L. _alba spina_, white thorn.]

ALBIGENSES, al-bi-jen's[=e]z, _n.pl._ a name applied to antisacerdotal
sects in the south of France during the 12th and 13th centuries, infected
with Manichæan heresy, and extirpated with the most horrible cruelties.
[The town _Albi_.]

ALBINO, al-b[=i]'no, _n._ a human being or animal whose skin and hair are
abnormally white, and the pupil of the eye of pink colour:--_fem._
ALB[=I]'NESS:--_pl._ ALB[=I]'NOS.--_n._ AL'BINISM, state or condition of
being an albino. [Sp. _albino_, whitish--L. _albus_, white.]

ALBITE, al'b[=i]t, _n._ a species of mineral of the felspar family, of a
white colour, and forming a constituent of many kinds of rocks. [From L.
_albus_, white.]

ALBUGINEOUS, al-b[=u]-jin'e-us, _adj._ like the white of an egg or of the
eye. [L. _albugo_, _albuginis_, whiteness, from _albus_, white.]

ALBUM, al'bum, _n._ among the Romans, a white tablet or register on which
the prætor's edicts and such public notices were recorded: a blank book for
the insertion of portraits, autographs, poetical extracts, memorial verses,
postage-stamps, or the like.--_adj._ AL'BUM[=E]'AN, and _n._ AL'BUMESS,
whimsical coinages of Charles Lamb. [L. _albus_, white.]

ALBUMEN, al-b[=u]'men, _n._ the white of eggs: a like substance found in
animal and vegetable bodies.--_ns._ ALB[=U]'MIN, one of the classes of
albuminoids, such as are soluble in water, or in dilute acids or alkalis;
ALB[=U]'MINATE, one of a class of bodies in which albumin appears in weak
combination with a base.--_v.t._ ALBUMINISE' (_phot._), to cover or
impregnate with albumen: to coat paper with an albuminous solution.--_adj._
ALB[=U]'MINOUS, like or containing albumen: insipid. [L.--_albus_, white.]

ALBUMINOID, al-b[=u]'min-oid, _adj._ like albumen.--_n._ one of a class of
nitrogenous compounds derived from animal tissues. [ALBUMEN, and Gr.
_eidos_, form.]

ALBURNUM, al-burn'um, _n._ in trees, the white and soft parts of wood
between the inner bark and the heart-wood.--_adj._ ALBURN'OUS.
[L.--_albus_, white.]

ALCAHEST. See ALKAHEST.

ALCAIC, al-k[=a]'ik, _adj._ of or pertaining to the Greek lyrical poet,
Alcæus (_c._ 600 B.C.), or to the kind of verse invented by him. The most
common form consists of an anacrusis, a trochee, a spondee, and two
dactyls; a second, of a catalectic iambic pentameter, the third foot always
being a spondee; a third, of two dactyls followed by two trochees. The most
common arrangement was two lines of (1), followed by one of (2) and one of
(3). Cf. Tennyson's 'O mighty-mouth'd inventor of harmonies.'

ALCAID, ALCAYDE, al-k[=a]d', _n._ a governor: a chief magistrate: a gaoler.
[Sp. and Port.--Ar. _alk[=a][=i]d_--_al_, the, _q[=a][=i]d_, a leader,
_q[=a]da_, to lead.]

ALCALDE, al-kal'd[=a], _n._ a judge. [Sp.--Ar. _al-q[=a]d[=i]_.]

ALCATRAS, al'ka-tras, _n._ a name applied loosely to several large ocean
birds, as the pelican, gannet, frigate-bird, and even the albatross. [Sp.
_alcatraz_, a white pelican.]

ALCHEMY, ALCHYMY, al'ki-mi, _n._ the infant stage of chemistry, as
astrology was of astronomy.--A chief pursuit of the alchemists was to
transmute the other metals into gold, and to discover the elixir of
life.--_adj._ ALCHEM'IC--_n._ AL'CHEMIST, one skilled in alchemy. [Ar.
_Al-k[=i]m[=i][=a]_--_al_, the, and _k[=i]m[=i][=a]_--late Gr.
_ch[=e]meia_, 'transmution,' prob. as specially an Egyptian art, from
_Khem_, the native name of Egypt; confused with Gr. _ch[=u]meia_, pouring,
from _chein_, to pour, hence the old spellings _alchymy_, _chymistry_.]

ALCOHOL, al'k[=o]-hol, _n._ pure spirit, a liquid generated by the
fermentation of sugar and other saccharine matter, and forming the
intoxicating element of fermented liquors.--_adj._ ALCOHOL'IC, of or like
alcohol.--_n._ ALCOHOLIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ AL'COHOLISE, to convert into
alcohol, or saturate with it: to rectify.--_n._ AL'COHOLISM, a term
employed to denote the symptoms of disease produced by alcoholic
poisoning.--ABSOLUTE ALCOHOL, alcohol entirely free from water. [Ar.
_al-koh'l_--_al_, the, _koh'l_, fine powder of antimony used in the East to
stain the eyelids.]

ALCOHOLOMETER, al-k[=o]-hol-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for
ascertaining the strength of spirits.--_n._ ALCOHOLOM'ETRY, the process of
such measurement. [ALCOHOL and METER.]

ALCORAN, al'k[=o]-ran, _n._ the Koran. [_Al_, the Arabic article.]

ALCOVE, al'k[=o]v, or al-k[=o]v', _n._ a recess in a room: any recess: a
shady retreat. [Sp. _alcoba_, a place in a room railed off to hold a
bed--Ar. _al_, the, _qobbah_, a vault.]

ALDEHYDE, al'd[=e]-h[=i]d, _n._ a volatile fluid with a suffocating smell,
obtained by the oxidation of alcohol: a large class of compounds
intermediate between alcohols and acids. [From _Al. dehyd._, a contr. for
_Alcohol dehydrogenatum_.]

ALDER, awl'd[.e]r, _n._ a tree related to the birch, usually growing in
moist ground. [A.S. _alor_; Ger. _erle_; L. _alnus_.]

ALDER-LIEFEST, awl-d[.e]r-l[=e]f'est, _adj._ (_Shak._) most beloved of all.
[The M. E. gen. pl. forms _alra_, _alre_, _aller_, _alder_, survived till
about 1600; for _liefest_, see LIEF.]

ALDERMAN, awl'd[.e]r-man, _n._ in English and Irish boroughs, a civic
dignitary next in rank to the mayor.--They are usually chosen for three
years; those of London are chosen for life.--The name was assumed
incongruously enough for superior members of the county councils set up in
England in 1888: in Anglo-Saxon times, the governor of a shire until by
Canute displaced by the earl; thenceforward, any head man of a
guild.--_adjs._ ALDERMAN'IC, AL'DERMANLIKE, AL'DERMANLY, pompous and
portly. [A.S. _ealdor_ (from _eald_, old), senior, chief; _ealdorman_,
ruler, king, chief magistrate.]

ALDERN, awl'd[.e]rn, _adj._ made of alder.

ALDINE, al'd[=i]n, _adj._ applied to books printed by Aldus Manutius of
Venice, in 16th century.

ALE, [=a]l, _n._ a beverage made from an infusion of malt by fermentation:
a festival, so called from the liquor drunk.--_ns._ ALE'BERRY, a beverage
made from ale; ALE'CONNER, an ale-taster, a civic officer appointed to test
the quality of the ale brewed--A.S. _cunnere_, a trier; ALE'-HOUSE, a house
in which ale is sold. [A.S. _alu_; Ice. _öl_.]

ALEATORY, [=a]'l[=e]-a-t[=o]-ri, _adj._ depending on the throw of the dice:
dependent on certain contingencies. [L. _[=a]le[=a]t[=o]rius_, _[=a]lea_, a
die.]

ALEE, a-l[=e]', _adv._ on the lee-side. [See LEE.]

ALEFT, a-left', _adv._ on or to the left hand.

ALEGAR, al'e-gar, _n._ sour ale. [ALE, and Fr. _aigre_--L. _acer_, sour.]

ALEGER, al'e-j[.e]r, _adj._ (_Bacon_) lively, cheerful. [O. Fr.
_alègre_--L. _al[=a]cr-em_.]

ALEGGE, an obsolete form of ALLEGE.

ALEMBIC, al-em'bik, _n._ a vessel used by the old chemists in distillation.
[Ar. _al_, the, _anb[=i]q_--Gr. _ambiks_, a cup.]

ALENGTH, a-length', _adv._ at full length. [A.S. pfx. _a-_, on, and
LENGTH.]

ALERCE, a-lers', _n._ the wood of the sandarac-tree: the Chilian _Arbor
vitæ_--both of the pine family. [Sp.--Ar. _al arza_, cedar.]

ALERT, al-[.e]rt', _adj._ watchful: brisk.--_n._ a sudden attack or
surprise.--_adv._ ALERT'LY.--_n._ ALERT'NESS.--UPON THE ALERT, upon the
watch. [Fr.--It. _all' erta_, on the erect--_erto_, L. _erectus_, erect.]

ALEW, a-l[=u]' (_Spens._) an obsolete form of HALLOO.

ALEWIFE, [=a]l'w[=i]f, _n._ a fish of the same genus as the shad, about a
foot in length, common on the east coast of North America. [Said to be a
corr. of _aloofe_, the Indian name of a fish.]

ALEXANDRIAN, al-egz-an'dri-an, _adj._ relating to Alexandria in Egypt, or
its school of philosophy: relating to Alexander.

ALEXANDRINE, al-egz-an'drin, _n._ a rhyming verse of twelve syllables, six
iambic feet, so-called from its use in old French poems on _Alexander_ the
Great. It is the ordinary verse of French tragedy. French Alexandrines are
arranged in couplets, alternately acatalectic with masculine rhymes, and
hypercatalectic with feminine rhymes.

ALFA, al'fa, _n._ an African name for esparto grass--also spelt HALFA.

ALFALFA, al-fal'fa, _n._ a Spanish name for a variety of lucerne--used also
in some parts of the United States. [Sp. _alfalfa_, three-leaved grass; Ar.
_alfacfacah_.]

ALFRESCO, al-fresk'o, _adv._ on the fresh, as to paint _al fresco_ = on the
fresh plaster: in the fresh or cool air. [It.]

ALGÆ, al'j[=e], _n._ (_bot._) a division of plants, embracing seaweeds.
[L., pl. of _alga_, seaweed.]

ALGATES, al'g[=a]ts, _adv._ (_obs._) always, altogether, at all events,
nevertheless.--Also AL'GATE. [Lit. _alle gate_, every way. See GATE.]

ALGEBRA, al'je-bra, _n._ a method of calculating by symbols--by means of
letters employed to represent the numbers, and signs to represent their
relations, thus forming a kind of universal arithmetic.--_adjs._
ALGEBR[=A]'IC, -AL, pertaining to algebra.--_n._ ALGEBR[=A]'IST, one
skilled in algebra. [It. and Sp., from Ar. _al-jebr_, the resetting of
anything broken, hence combination; _jabara_, to reunite.]

ALGERINE, al'je-r[=e]n, _adj._ of or belonging to Algeria in Northern
Africa.--_n._ a native of Algeria: a pirate.

ALGORISM, al'go-rizm, _n._ the Arabic system of numeration:
arithmetic.--Also AL'GORITHM [Through O. Fr. and Late L. from Ar.
_al-khow[=a]razm[=i]_, the native of Khw[=a]razm, the mathematician Abu
Ja'far Mohammed Ben Musa (9th century).]

ALGOUS, al'gus, _adj._ relating to or like the algæ or seaweeds.

ALGUAZIL, al-gwaz'il, _n._ in Spain, a warrant officer or sergeant.
[Sp.--Ar. _al-waz[=i]r_. See VIZIER.]

ALGUM, al'gum. Same as ALMUG.

ALHAMBRESQUE, al-ham'bresk, _adj._ after the style of the rich
ornamentation of the Alhambra, a palace of the Moorish kings of Granada in
Spain.

ALIAS, [=a]'li-as, _adv._ otherwise.--_n._ an assumed name:--_pl._
A'LIASES. [L. _alias_, at another time, otherwise--_alius_, Gr. _allos_,
other.]

ALIBI, al'i-b[=i], _n._ the plea that a person charged with a crime was
elsewhere when it was committed. [L.--_alius_, other, _ibi_, there.]

ALICANT, al'i-kant, _n._ a Spanish wine formerly much esteemed, said to
have been made near Alicante in Spain.

ALIEN, [=a]l'yen, _adj._ foreign: different in nature: adverse to.--_n._
one belonging to another country: one not entitled to the rights of
citizenship.--_n._ AL'IENAGE, state of being an alien. [L.
_alienus_--_alius_, other.]

ALIENATE, [=a]l'yen-[=a]t, _v.t._ to transfer a right or title to another:
to withdraw the affections: to misapply.--_adj._ withdrawn:
estranged.--_n._ ALIENABIL'ITY.--_adj._ AL'IENABLE, capable of being
transferred to another.--_ns._ ALIEN[=A]'TION; ALIEN[=A]'TOR.--_adj._
AL'IENED, made alien, estranged.--_n._ AL'IENISM, the position of being a
foreigner. [L. See ALIEN.]

ALIENIST, [=a]l'yen-ist, _n._ one who specially treats mental diseases.
[Fr.]

ALIFE, a-l[=i]f', _adv._ (_obs._) on my life, as one's life, excessively.

ALIGHT, a-l[=i]t', _v.i._ to come down, as from a horse (_from_): to
descend: to land anywhere (_upon_): to fall upon. [A.S. _alíhtan_, to come
down. See LIGHT, _v._]

ALIGHT, a-l[=i]t', _adj._ on fire: lighted up. [_a_, on, and LIGHT. See
LIGHT, _n._]

ALIGN, a-l[=i]n', _v.t._ to regulate by a line: to arrange in line, as
troops.--_n._ ALIGN'MENT, a laying out by a line: arrangement of soldiers
in a line or lines: the ground-plan of a railway or road. [Fr.
_aligner_--L. _ad_, and _linea_, a line.]

ALIKE, a-l[=i]k', _adj._ like one another: having resemblance.--_adv._ in
the same manner or form: equally: similarly. [A.S. _gelíc_, _anlíc_,
_onlíc_. See LIKE.]

ALIMENT, al'i-ment, _n._ nourishment: food: provision for maintenance,
alimony: support.--_v.t._ to support, sustain: make provision for the
maintenance of.--_adjs._ ALIMENT'AL, supplying food; ALIMENT'ARY,
pertaining to aliment: nutritive.--_ns._ ALIMENT[=A]'TION, the act or state
of nourishing or of being nourished; ALIMENT'IVENESS (_phrenol._), desire
for food or drink; AL'IMONY, an allowance for support made to a wife when
legally separated from her husband, or temporarily while the process is
pending.--ALIMENTARY CANAL, the principal part of the digestive apparatus
of animals, in man extending, with convolutions, about 30 feet from the
mouth to the anus--including pharynx, oesophagus, stomach, small and large
intestine, &c. [L. _alimentum--al[)e]re_, to nourish.]

ALINEATION. See ALLINEATION.

ALIPED, al'i-ped, _adj._ wing-footed.--_n._ an animal whose toes are
connected by a membrane serving as a wing, as the bat. [L. _alipes_--_ala_,
a wing, and _pes_, _pedis_, a foot.]

ALIQUANT, al'i-kwant, _adj._ an aliquant part of a number is one that will
not divide it without a remainder, thus 5 is an aliquant part of 12. [L.
_aliquantum_, somewhat, _alius_, another, and _quantus_, how great.]

ALIQUOT, al'i-kwot, _adj._ such a part of a number as will divide it
without a remainder. [L. _aliquot_, some, several--_alius_, other, _quot_,
how many.]

ALISMA, al-iz'ma, _n._ a small genus of aquatic plants, the chief being the
common water-plantain. [Gr.]

ALIVE, a-l[=i]v', _adj._ in life: susceptible. [Prep. _a = on_, and A.S.
_lífe_, dat. of _líf_, life.]

ALIZARIN, a-liz'a-r[=e]n, _n._ a colouring matter used in the dyeing of
Turkey red, formerly extracted from madder, the commercial name of which in
the Levant is _alizari_. [Fr.; Ar. _al_, the, and _'aç[=a]rah_, juice
pressed out.]

ALKAHEST, ALCAHEST, al'ka-hest, _n._ the universal solvent of the
alchemists. [A coinage of Paracelsus--on Arabic analogies.]

ALKALI, al'ka-li, or -l[=i], _n._ (_chem._) a substance which combines with
an acid and neutralises it, forming a salt. Potash, soda, and lime are
alkalies; they have an acrid taste (that of soap), and turn vegetable blues
to green:--_pl._ AL'KALIES.--_n._ ALKALES'CENCY, tendency to become
alkaline.--_adj._ ALKALES'CENT, tending to become alkaline: slightly
alkaline.--_n._ ALKALIM'ETER, an instrument for measuring the strength of
alkalies.--_adj._ ALKALINE (al'ka-l[=i]n, or -lin), having the properties
of an alkali.--_n._ ALKALIN'ITY.--_v.t._ AL'KALISE, to render
alkaline:--_pr.p._ al'kal[=i]sing; _pa.p._ al'kal[=i]sed. See ACID. [Ar.
_al_-_qal[=i]y_, ashes.]

ALKALIFY, al'ka-li-f[=i], _v.t._ to convert into an alkali.--_v.i._ to
become alkaline:--_pr.p._ al'kalifying; _pa.p._ al'kalif[=i]ed.--_adj._
ALKALIF[=I]'ABLE, capable of being converted into an alkali. [ALKALI, and
L. _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ALKALOID, al'ka-loid, _n._ a vegetable principle possessing in some degree
alkaline properties.--_adj._ pertaining to or resembling alkali. [ALKALI,
and Gr. _eidos_, form or resemblance.]

ALKANET, al'ka-net, _n._ a plant, native of the Levant and Southern Europe,
cultivated for its root, which yields a red colouring matter: the dye
itself. [Sp. _alcaneta_.]

ALKORAN, _n._ Same as ALCORAN.

ALL, awl, _adj._ the whole of: every one of: any whatever.--_adv._ wholly:
completely: entirely: (_Shak._) only, alone.--_n._ the whole: everything:
the totality of things--the universe.--_n._ ALL'-FATH'ER, God.--ALL
(_obs._), entirely, altogether, as in 'all to-brake' (Judges, ix. 53). The
prefix _to-_ originally belonged to the verb (_tó brecan_), but as verbs
with this prefix were rarely used without _all_, the fact was forgotten,
and the _to_ was erroneously regarded as belonging to the _all_. Hence came
into use _all_-_to_ = wholly, utterly; ALL BUT, everything short of,
almost; ALL IN ALL, all things in all respects, all or everything
together--(_adverbially_) altogether; ALL OVER, thoroughly, entirely; ALL
OVER WITH, finished, done with (also _coll._, ALL UP with); ALL RIGHT, a
colloquial phrase expressing assent or approbation; ALL'S ONE, it is just
the same; ALL TO ONE (_obs._), altogether.--AFTER ALL, when everything has
been considered, nevertheless; AND ALL, and everything else; AND ALL THAT,
and all the rest of it, _et cetera_; AT ALL, in the least degree or to the
least extent.--FOR ALL, notwithstanding; FOR GOOD AND ALL, finally.--ONCE
FOR ALL, once only. [A.S. _all_, _eal_; Ger. _all_, Gael. _uile_, W.
_oll._]

ALLAH, al'la, _n._ the Arabic name of the one God. [Ar. _al-ilâh_, 'the
worthy to be adored.']

ALLANTOIS, a-lan't[=o]-is, _n._ a membranous sac-like appendage for
effecting oxygenation in the embryos of mammals, birds, and
reptiles.--_adjs._ ALLANT[=O]'IC, ALLAN'TOID. [Gr. _allas_, a sausage.]

ALLAY, al-l[=a]', _v.t._ to lighten, relieve: to make quiet or calm.--_n._
ALLAY'MENT (_obs._), state of being allayed: state of rest: that which
allays. [M. E. forms, _aleggen_, _aleyen_ (A.S. _a-lecgan_; lecgan, causal
of _licgan_, to lie); identical in form, and accordingly confounded in
meaning with M. E. words of Latin origin; _alegge_ (later _allege_, now
obs.)--L. _allevi[=a]re_; _alaye_ (modern _allay_, _alloy_)--L.
_allig[=a]re_; _aleye_ (obs.)--L. _alleg[=a]re_; _alegge_ (modern
_allege_)--Low L. _ex-litig[=a]re_.]

ALLAY, an obsolete form of ALLOY.

ALLEDGE. Old spelling of ALLEGE.

ALLEGE, al-lej', _v.t._ to produce as an argument or plea: to assert:
(_B_.) to give proofs--_n._ ALLEG[=A]'TION, an assertion.--_p.adj._
ALLEGED', cited, quoted. [Through O. Fr. forms from Low L.
_ex-litig[=a]re_, to clear at law. See ALLAY above.]

ALLEGIANCE, al-l[=e]j'i-ans, _n._ the duty of a subject to his liege or
sovereign.--_adj._ ALL[=E]'GIANT. [L. _ad_, to, and LIEGE.]

ALLEGORY, al'le-gor-i, _n._ a description of one thing under the image of
another.--_adjs._ ALLEGOR'IC, -al, in the form of an allegory:
figurative.--_adv._ ALLEGOR'ICALLY.--_v.t._ AL'LEGORISE, to put in form of
an allegory.--_v.i._ to use allegory.--_ns._ AL'LEGORIST, one who uses
allegory; ALLEGORIZ[=A]'TION. [Gr. _all[=e]goria_; _allos_, other, and
_agoreuein_, to speak.]

ALLEGRO, al-l[=e]'gr[=o], _adv._ and _adj._ (_mus._) a word denoting a
brisk movement.--_adv._ and _adj._ ALLEGRET'TO, somewhat brisk. [It.--L.
_alacer_, brisk.]

ALLELUIA, ALLELUIAH, al-le-l[=oo]'ya. Same as HALLELUIAH.

ALLEMANDE, al'le-mand, _n._ a name given to various Germain dances:
(_mus._) the first movement after the prelude in a suite. [Fr. _Allemande_,
German.]

ALLENARLY, al-len'ar-li, _adv._ solely, only--obsolete save only in Scotch
conveyancing. [All, and _anerly_, formed from _ane_, one.]

ALLEVIATE, al-l[=e]v'i-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make light: to mitigate.--_ns._
ALLEVI[=A]'TION; ALLEV'I[=A]TOR. [L. _ad_, _levis_, light.]

ALLEY, al'li, _n._ a walk in a garden or shrubbery: a passage in a city
narrower than a street: a long narrow enclosure for playing at bowls or
skittles:--_pl._ ALL'EYS. [O. Fr. _alee_ (Fr. _allée_), a passage, from
_aller_, to go, O. Fr. _aner_, most prob. from L. _adn[=a]re_, to go to by
water, or _adit[=a]re_, _ad[=i]re_.]

ALLEY, ALLY, al'li, _n._ a name given by boys to a choice taw or large
marble. [Contraction of _alabaster_, of which it was originally made.]

ALL-FIRED, awl-f[=i]rd', _adj._ (_slang_) infernal.--_adv._ excessively. [A
softening of _hell-fired_, U.S.]

ALL-FOOLS'-DAY, awl-f[=oo]lz'-d[=a], _n._ April first. [From the sportive
deceptions practised on that day.]

ALL-FOURS, awl-f[=o]rz', _n.pl._ (preceded by _on_) on four legs, or on two
hands and two feet: a game at cards played by two, so called from the four
particulars by which the reckoning is made--_high_, _low_, _Jack_, and _the
game_: also a game at dominoes.

ALL-HAIL, awl-h[=a]l', _interj._ all health! a phrase of salutation. [See
HAIL, interj.]

ALL-HALLOW, awl-hal'l[=o], ALL-HALLOWS, awl-hal'l[=o]z, _n._ the day of all
the holy ones. See ALL-SAINTS. [ALL and HALLOW.]

ALL-HALLOW-MASS. See HALLOW-MASS.

ALL-HALLOWN, awl-hal'l[=o]n, _n._ (_Shak._) fine summer weather late in the
season--near All-hallows-day.

ALL-HALLOW-TIDE, awl-hal'l[=o]-t[=i]d, _n._ the time near All-hallows-day.
[See HALLOW and TIDE.]

ALLHEAL, awl-h[=e]l', _n._ (_obs._) a balsam for all wounds, a
panacea--applied to various plants, as the mistletoe, the great valerian,
&c.

ALLIACEOUS, al-li-[=a]'shus, _adj._ pertaining to, or having the properties
of allium or garlic. [L. _allium_, garlic.]

ALLIANCE, al-l[=i]'ans, _n._ state of being allied: union by marriage or
treaty. [See ALLY.]

ALLIGATION, al-li-g[=a]'shun, _n._ (_arith._) a rule for finding the price
of a compound of ingredients of different values. [L. _alligatio_, a
binding together--_ad_, to, and _lig[=a]re_, to bind.]

ALLIGATOR, al'li-g[=a]-tur, _n._ an animal of the crocodile genus, found in
America. [Sp. _el lagarto_--L. _lacerta_, a lizard.]

ALLINEATION, ALINEATION, al-lin-e-[=a]'shun, _n._ the position of two or
more bodies in a straight line with a given point.

ALLISION, al-lizh'un, _n._ a striking against. [L. _allisio_, from
_allid[)e]re_--_ad_, and _læd[)e]re_, to hurt.]

ALLITERATION, al-lit-[.e]r-[=a]'shun, _n._ the recurrence of the same
letter at the beginning of two or more words following close to each other,
as in Churchill's '_a_pt _a_lliteration's _a_rtful _a_id:' the recurrence
of the same initial sound in the first accented syllables of words: initial
rhyme--the characteristic structure of versification of Old English and
Teutonic languages generally. Every alliterative couplet had two accented
syllables, containing the same initial consonants, one in each of the two
sections.--_v.i._ ALLIT'ERATE, to begin with the same letter: to constitute
alliteration.--_adj._ ALLIT'ERATIVE. [Fr.--L. _ad_, to, and _litera_, a
letter.]

ALLOCATE, al'lo-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to place: to assign to each his share.--_n._
ALLOC[=A]'TION, act of allocating: allotment: an allowance made upon an
account. [L. _alloc[=a]re_, _ad_, to, and _loc[=a]re_, _locus_, a place.]

ALLOCUTION, al-lo-k[=u]'shun, _n._ a formal address, esp. of the Pope to
his clergy. [L. _allocutionem_--_ad_, to, and _loqui_, _locutus_, to
speak.]

ALLODIAL, al-l[=o]'di-al, _adj._ held independent of a superior:
freehold--opp. to _Feudal_.

ALLODIUM, al-l[=o]'di-um, _n._ freehold estate: land held in the possession
of the owner without being subject to a feudal superior.--Also ALLOD, ALOD.
[Low L. _all[=o]dium_--Ger. _alôd_, _allôd_.]

ALLOGRAPH, al'l[=o]-graf, _n._ a writing made by one person on behalf of
another. [Gr. _allos_, other, _graph[=e]_, writing.]

ALLOPATHY, al-lop'a-thi, _n._ a name given by homeopathists to the current
or orthodox medical practice, to distinguish it from their own
Homeopathy.--_adj._ ALLOPATH'IC--_ns._ ALLOP'ATHIST, ALLOPATH. [Coined by
Hahnemann (1755-1843), Ger. _allopathie_--Gr. _allos_, other, _patheia_,
_pathos_, suffering.]

ALLOPHYLIAN, al-l[=o]-f[=i]l'i-an, _adj._ of another race, alien--applied
by Prichard (1786-1848) to the Turanian or non-Aryan and non-Semitic
languages of Europe and Asia.--_n._ ALLOPHYLE'. [L.--Gr. _alloph[=y]los_,
of another tribe; _allos_, other, _ph[=y]l[=e]_, a tribe.]

ALLOT, al-lot', _v.t._ to divide as by lot: to distribute in portions: to
parcel out:--_pr.p._ allot'ting; _pa.p._ allot'ted.--_n._ ALLOT'MENT, the
act of allotting: part or share allotted: a portion of a field assigned to
a cottager to labour for himself. [O. Fr. _aloter_; _lot_ is Teut., seen in
Goth. _hlauts_, A.S. _hlot_.]

ALLOTROPY, al-lot'ro-pi, _n._ the property in some elements, as carbon, of
existing in more than one form.--_adj._ ALLOT'ROPIC. [Gr.; _allos_,
another, and _tropos_, form.]

ALLOVERISHNESS, awl-[=o]'v[.e]r-ish-nes, _n._ a general sense of
indisposition over the whole body, a feeling of discomfort,
malaise.--_adj._ ALL[=O]'VERISH.

ALLOW, al-low', _v.t._ to grant: to permit: to acknowledge: to abate: make
allowance for: (_obs._) invest, entrust: assert, say (_coll._ in
U.S.).--_adj._ ALLOW'ABLE, that may be allowed: not forbidden:
lawful.--_n._ ALLOW'ABLENESS.--_adv._ ALLOW'ABLY.--_n._ ALLOW'ANCE, that
which is allowed: a limited portion of anything: a stated quantity--of
money, &c., to meet expenses: abatement: approbation: permission.--_v.t._
to put any one upon an allowance: to supply anything in limited
quantities.--TO MAKE ALLOWANCE FOR, to take excusing circumstances into
account. [O. Fr. _alouer_, to grant--L. _ad_, to, and _loc[=a]re_, to
place.--ALLOW, in the sense of _approve_ or _sanction_, as used in _B._ and
by old writers, has its root in L. _allaud[=a]re_--_ad-_, and _laud[=a]re_,
to praise.]

ALLOY, al-loi', _v.t._ to mix one metal with another: to reduce the purity
of a metal by mixing a baser one with it: (_fig._) to debase: to temper or
qualify.--_n._ a mixture of two or more metals (when mercury is one of the
ingredients, it is an _amalgam_): a baser metal mixed with a finer:
anything that deteriorates.--_n._ ALLOY'AGE, the act of alloying or mixing
metals: a mixture of different metals. [O. Fr. _alei_ (Fr. _aloi_),
_aleier_--L. _allig[=a]re_. The modern Fr. words _aloi_ and _aloyer_ were
confounded with Fr. _à loi_, to law, and the same confusion was transferred
into English.]

ALL-SAINTS'-DAY, awl-s[=a]nts'-d[=a], _n._ November 1, a feast of the
Church in honour of all the saints collectively. [See ALL-HALLOWS.]

ALL-SOULS'-DAY, awl-s[=o]lz'-d[=a], _n._ November 2, a feast of the Roman
Catholic Church kept in commemoration of all the faithful departed, for the
eternal repose of their souls.

ALLSPICE, awl'sp[=i]s, _n._ a name given to a kind of spice called Pimenta
or Jamaica pepper, from its being supposed to combine the flavour of
cinnamon, nutmeg, and cloves. [ALL and SPICE.]

ALLUDE, al-l[=u]d', _v.i._ to mention slightly, or convey an indirect
reference to, in passing: to refer to.--_n._ ALL[=U]'SION, an indirect
reference.--_adj._ ALLUS'IVE, alluding to: hinting at: referring to
indirectly.--_adv._ ALLUS'IVELY.--ALLUSIVE ARMS (_her._), also _canting_ or
_punning_ arms, and _armes parlantes_, those in which the charges convey
reference to the bearer's name or title, as the column of the Colonna
family, the Vele calf (O. Fr. _veël_, a calf), the Arundel martlets (O. Fr.
_arondel_, a young swallow). [L. _allud[)e]re_--_ad_, at, _lud[)e]re_,
_lusum_, to play.]

ALLUMETTE, al-[=u]-m[.e]t', _n._ a match for lighting. [Fr.]

ALLURE, al-l[=u]r', _v.t._ to draw on as by a lure or bait: to
entice.--_n._ ALLURE'MENT.--_adj._ ALLUR'ING, enticing: seductive:
charming.--_adv._ ALLUR'INGLY. [O. Fr. _alurer_--_à_, to, _lurer_, to
LURE.]

ALLUVION, al-l[=u]'vi-un, _n._ land gained from the sea by the washing up
of sand and earth. [L. _alluvio_--_allu[)e]re_. See ALLUVIUM.]

ALLUVIUM, al-l[=u]'vi-um, _n._ the mass of water-borne matter deposited by
rivers on lower lands:--_pl._ ALL[=U]'VIA.--_adj._ ALL[=U]'VIAL.
[L.--_allu[)e]re_, to wash to or on--_ad_, and _lu[)e]re_ = _lav[=a]re_, to
wash.]

ALLY, al-l[=i]', _v.t._ to form a relation by marriage, friendship, treaty,
or resemblance.--_pa.p._ and _adj._ ALLIED'.--_n._ ALLY (al-l[=i]', or
al'l[=i]), a confederate: a prince or state united by treaty or
league:--_pl._ ALL[=I]ES', or AL'L[=I]ES. [O. Fr. _alier_--L.
_allig[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _lig[=a]re_, to bind.]

ALMA, ALMAH, al'ma, _n._ an Egyptian dancing-girl.--Also ALME, ALMEH. [Ar.
_`almah_, learned, _`alamah_, to know.]

ALMACANTAR, al-mak-an'tar, _n._ a name for circles of altitude parallel to
the horizon, and hence for an astronomical instrument for determining time
and latitude. [Ar. _almuqantar[=a]t_, _qantarah_, an arch.]

ALMAGEST, al'ma-jest, _n._ a collection of problems in geometry and
astronomy, drawn up by the Egyptian astronomer Ptolemy (about 140 A.D.), so
named by the Arabs as the greatest and largest on the subject. [Ar. _al_,
the, and Gr. _megistos_, greatest.]

ALMAIN, al'm[=a]n, _n._ (_obs._) an inhabitant of Germany: a kind of dance
music in slow time. [Fr. _Allemand_--_Allemanni_, an ancient German tribe.]

ALMANAC, al'ma-nak, _n._ a register of the days, weeks, and months of the
year, &c.--_n._ ALMANOG'RAPHER, an almanac-maker. [Most prob. the original
of the word as in Fr., It., and Sp. was a Spanish-Arabic _al-man[=a]kh_.
Eusebius has _almenichiaka_, an Egyptian word, prob. sig. 'daily
observation of things,' but the history of the word has not been traced,
and it is hazardous without evidence to connect this with the Arabic word.]

ALMANDINE, al'man-d[=i]n, _n._ a red transparent variety of the
garnet.--Also AL'MANDIN. [Earlier ALABANDINE--Low L.
_alabandina_--_Alabanda_, a town in Caria, a province of Asia Minor, where
it was found.]

ALMIGHTY, awl-m[=i]t'i, _adj._ possessing all might or power: omnipotent:
very powerful generally: (_slang_) mighty, great.--Older form
ALMIGHT'.--_adv._ ALMIGHT'ILY.--_ns._ ALMIGHT'INESS, ALMIGHT'YSHIP.--THE
ALMIGHTY, God; THE ALMIGHTY DOLLAR, a phrase of Washington Irving's,
expressive of the greatness of the power of money. [A.S. _ælmeahtig_. See
ALL and MIGHTY.]

ALMNER, an old spelling of ALMONER.

ALMOND, ä'mund, _n._ the fruit of the almond-tree.--_n.pl._ ALMONDS
(ä'mundz), the tonsils or glands of the throat, so called from their
resemblance to the fruit of the almond-tree. [O. Fr. _almande_ (Fr.
_amande_)--L. _amygdalum_--Gr. _amygdal[=e]_.]

ALMONER, al'mun-[.e]r, _n._ a distributer of alms.--_n._ AL'MONRY, the
place where alms are distributed. [O. Fr. _aumoner_, _aumonier_ (Fr.
_aumônier_)--Low L. _eleemosynarius_ (adj.). See ALMS.]

ALMOST, awl'm[=o]st, _adv._ nearly, all but, very nearly. [ALL and MOST.]

ALMRY, äm'ri, _n._ Same as ALMONRY.

ALMS, ämz, _n._ relief given out of pity to the poor.--_ns._ ALMS'-DEED, a
charitable deed; ALMS'-DRINK (_Shak._), leavings of drink; ALMS'-FEE, an
annual tax of one penny on every hearth, formerly sent from England to
Rome, Peter's pence; ALMS'HOUSE, a house endowed for the support and
lodging of the poor; ALMS'-MAN, a man who lives by alms. [A.S. _ælmysse_,
through Late L., from Gr. _ele[=e]mosyn[=e]_--_eleos_, compassion. Dr
Murray notes the Scot. and North Country _almous_, _awmous_, as an
independent adoption of the cognate Norse _almusa_; and the legal ALMOIGN,
ALMOIN, perpetual tenure by free gift of charity, from O. Fr., perhaps due
to a confusion with _alimonium_.]

ALMUCE, an early form of AMICE.

ALMUG, al'mug, _n._ the wood of a tree described in the Bible as brought
from Ophir in the time of Solomon, for the house and temple at Jerusalem,
and for musical instruments--probably the red sandalwood of India. [Heb.
_algummîm_, _almuggîm_. The better form is ALGUM.]

ALOE, al'[=o], _n._ a genus of plants of considerable medicinal importance,
of the 200 species of which as many as 170 are indigenous to the Cape
Colony.--The so-called American Aloe is a totally different plant (see
AGAVE).--_adj._ AL'OED, planted or shaded with aloes.--The ALOES WOOD of
the Bible was the heart-wood of _Aquilaria ovata_ and _Aquilaria
Agallochum_, large spreading trees. The wood contains a dark-coloured,
fragrant, resinous substance, much prized for the odour it diffuses in
burning. [The word was used erroneously in the Septuagint and New Testament
as a translation of the Heb. _ah[=a]l[=i]m_, _ah[=a]l[=o]th_ (Gr.
_agallochon_), an aromatic resin or wood--called later in Gr. _xylalo[=e]_,
from which descend _lignum aloes_, _lign-aloes_, _wood-aloes_, and
_aloes-wood_.--A.S. _aluwan_--L. _alo[=e]_--Gr. _alo[=e]_.]

ALOES, al'[=o]z, a purgative bitter drug, the inspissated juice of the
leaves of several almost tree-like species of aloe. Used both as a _sing.
n._, and as a _pl._ of ALOE.--_n._ and _adj._ ALOET'IC, a medicine
containing a large proportion of aloes.

ALOFT, a-loft', _adv._ on high: overhead: at a great height: (_naut._)
above the deck, at the masthead: sometimes used as equivalent to _aloof_
(_Mad. D'Arblay_). [Scand.; Icel. _á lopt_ (pron. _loft_), expressing
motion; _á lopti_, expressing positio_n._ Pfx. _a-_ = Icel. _á_ = A.S.
_on_, in. See LOFT.]

ALONE, al-[=o]n', _adj._ single: solitary: alone of its kind: of itself, or
by themselves.--_adv._ singly, by one's self only.--_n._ ALONE'NESS [ALL
and ONE.]

ALONG, a-long', _adv._ by or through the length of: lengthwise: throughout:
onward: (fol. by _with_) in company of.--_prep._ by the side of:
near.--_n.pl._ ALONG'SHORE-MEN, labourers employed about the docks or
wharves in the Thames and other rivers.--_prep._ ALONG'SIDE, by the side,
beside.--ALONG OF, (_arch._ or _dial._) owing to. [A.S. _andlang_--pfx.
_and-_, against, and _lang_, LONG.]

ALONGST, a-longst', _prep._ (_obs._ except _dial._) along: by the length.
[M. E. _alongest_, from _along_, with adv. gen. _-es_.]

ALOOF, a-l[=oo]f', _adv._ at a distance: apart.--_n._ ALOOF'NESS,
withdrawal from common action or sympathy. [Pfx. _a-_ (--A.S. _on_), on,
and LOOF, prob. Dut. _loef._ See LUFF.]

ALOPECIA, al-o-p[=e]'si-a, _n._ baldness: a skin-disease producing this.
[Gr. _alopekia_, fox-mange.]

ALOUD, a-lowd', _adv._ with a loud voice: loudly. [Prep. _a_ (--A.S. _on_),
and _hlúd_, noise; Ger. _laut_.]

ALOW, a-l[=o]', _adv._ in a low place--opp. to _Aloft_.

ALOW, al-low', _adv._ (_Scot._) ablaze. [Prep. _a_, and LOW, a flame.]

ALP, alp, _n._ a high mountain:--_pl._ ALPS, specially applied to the lofty
ranges of Switzerland.--_adjs._ ALP'EN; ALPINE (alp'in, or alp'[=i]n),
pertaining to the Alps, or to any lofty mountains: very high.--_ns._
AL'PINIST, ALPES'TRIAN, one devoted to Alpine climbing. [L.; of Celtic
origin; cf. Gael. _alp_, a mountain; allied to L. _albus_, white (with
snow).]

ALPACA, al-pak'a, _n._ the Peruvian sheep, akin to the llama, having long
silken wool: cloth made of its wool. [Sp. _alpaca_ or _al-paco_, from _al_,
Arab. article, and _paco_, most prob. a Peruvian word.]

ALPENHORN, al'pen-horn, _n._ a long powerful horn, wide and curved at the
mouth, used chiefly by Alpine cowherds.--Also ALP'HORN. [Gr. _Alpen_, of
the Alps, _horn_, horn.]

ALPENSTOCK, alp'n-stok, _n._ a long stick or staff used by travellers in
climbing the Alps. [Ger. _Alpen_, of the Alps; _stock_, stick.]

ALPHA, al'fa, _n._ the first letter of the Greek alphabet: the first or
beginning. [Gr. _alpha_--Heb. _aleph_, an ox, the name of the first letter
of the Phoenician and Hebrew alphabet. See A.]

ALPHABET, al'fa-bet, _n._ the letters of a language arranged in the usual
order.--_n._ ALPHABET[=A]'RIAN, one learning his alphabet, a beginner: a
student of alphabets.--_adjs._ ALPHABET'IC, -AL, relating to or in the
order of an alphabet.--_adv._ ALPHABET'ICALLY.--_v.t._ AL'PHABETISE, to
arrange alphabetically:--_pr.p._ al'phabet[=i]sing; _pa.p._
al'phabet[=i]sed. [Gr. _alpha_, _beta_, the first two Greek letters.]

ALPHONSINE, al'fons-[=i]n, _adj._ of Alphonso (X.) the Wise, king of
Castile, pertaining to his planetary tables, completed in 1252.

ALREADY, awl-red'i, _adv._ previously, or before the time
specified.--Sometimes used adjectively = present. [ALL and READY.]

ALS, an old form of ALSO.

ALSATIAN, al-s[=a]'shi-an, _adj._ of or pertaining to Alsatia (Ger.
_Elsass_), a province between France and Germany.--_n._ a rogue or
debauchee, such as haunted Alsatia--a cant name for Whitefriars, a district
in London between the Thames and Fleet Street, which enjoyed privileges of
sanctuary down to 1697, and was consequently infested with lawless
characters. See Scott's _Fortunes of Nigel_.

ALSO, awl'so, _adv._ in like manner: further. [Compounded of _all_ and
_so_; A.S. _al_ and _swá_.]

ALT, alt, _n._ high tone, in voice or instrument.--IN ALT, in the octave
above the treble stave beginning with G; (_fig._) in an exalted and
high-flown mood.

ALTALTISSIMO, alt-al-tis'si-mo, _n._ the very highest summit. [It.
reduplicated comp. of _alto_, high, and _altissimo_, highest.]

ALTAR, awlt'ar, _n._ an elevated place or structure, block or stone, or the
like, on which sacrifices were anciently offered: in Christian churches,
the table on which the officiating priest consecrates the eucharist: the
communion table: (_fig._) a place of worship.--_ns._ ALT'ARAGE, offerings
made upon the altar during the offertory, provided for the maintenance of
the priest; ALT'AR-CLOTH, the covering of the altar, placed over and around
it, of silk, velvet, satin, or cloth, often used as including the frontal
(_antependium_), and the super-frontal; ALT'ARPIECE, a decorative screen,
retable, or reredos, placed behind an altar--a work of art, whether a
sacred painting or sculpture.--_n.pl._ ALT'AR-RAILS, rails separating the
sacrarium from the rest of the chancel.--_ns._ ALT'AR-STONE, the slab
forming the top or chief part of an altar; ALT'AR-TOMB, a monumental
memorial, in form like an altar, often with a canopy. These were often
placed over the vaults or burying-place, and frequently on the north and
south walls of choirs, aisles, and chantry chapels.--_adj._ ALT'ARWISE,
placed like an altar--north and south, at the upper end of the
chancel.--FAMILY ALTAR, the practice or the place of private devotional
worship in the family; HIGH ALTAR, the principal altar in a cathedral or
other church having more than one altar; PORTABLE ALTAR, a small tablet of
marble, jasper, or precious stone, used by special license for Mass when
said away from the parish altar, in oratories or other similar places. It
was termed _super-altare_, because commonly placed upon some other altar,
or some fitting construction of wood or stone. [L. _alt[=a]re_--_altus_,
high.]

ALTAZIMUTH, alt-az'i-muth, _n._ an instrument devised by Sir G. B. Airy for
determining the apparent places of the heavenly bodies on the celestial
sphere. [A contr. for '_altitude_ and _azimuth_ instrument.']

ALTER, awl't[.e]r, _v.t._ to make different: to change: (_U.S._) to
castrate.--_v.i._ to become different: to vary.--_ns._ ALTERABIL'ITY,
AL'TERABLENESS.--_adj._ AL'TERABLE, that may be altered.--_adv._
AL'TERABLY.--_adj._ AL'TERANT, altering: having the power of producing
changes.--_n._ ALTER[=A]'TION, change.--_adj._ AL'TERATIVE, having power to
alter.--_n._ a medicine that makes a change in the vital functions.--_n._
ALTER'ITY (_Coleridge_), the state of being other or different. [L.
_alter_, another--_al_ (root of _alius_, other), and the old comp. suffix
_-ter_ = Eng. _-ther_.]

ALTERCATE, al't[.e]r-k[=a]t, _v.i._ to dispute or wrangle.--_n._
ALTERC[=A]'TION, contention: controversy.--_adj._ ALTERC[=A]'TIVE. [L.
_alterc[=a]ri_, _-catus_, to bandy words from one to the other (_alter_).]

ALTER EGO, al't[.e]r [=e]'go, _n._ second self, counterpart, double. [L.
_alter_, other; _ego_, I.]

ALTERNATE, al't[.e]r-n[=a]t, or al-t[.e]r'n[=a]t, _v.t._ to cause to follow
by turns or one after the other.--_v.i._ to happen by turns: to follow
every other or second time--also AL'TERNISE.--_adjs._ AL'TERN (_Milton_),
alternate, acting by turns; ALTER'NANT (_geol._), in alternate layers;
ALTER'NATE, one after the other: by turns.--_adv._ ALTER'NATELY.--_ns._
ALTER'NATENESS, ALTER'NACY (_rare_); ALTERN[=A]'TION, the act of
alternating: interchange: reading or singing antiphonally.--_adj._
ALTER'NATIVE, offering a choice of two things.--_n._ a choice between two
things.--_adv._ ALTER'NATIVELY. [L. _alter_, other.]

ALTHÆA, al-th[=e]'a, _n._ a genus of plants including the marsh mallow and
the hollyhock. [Gr.]

ALTHOUGH, awl-_th_[=o]', _conj._ admitting all that: notwithstanding that.
[See THOUGH.]

ALTIMETER, al-tim'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring
heights.--_adj._ ALTIMET'RICAL.--_n._ ALTIM'ETRY. [L. _altus_, high, and
METER.]

ALTISSIMO, al-tis'si-mo, _adj._ (_mus._) in phrase 'in altissimo,' in the
second octave above the treble stave beginning with G. [It. _altissimo_,
superl. of _alto_, high.]

ALTITUDE, alt'i-tude, _n._ height: a point or position at a height above
the sea: high rank or eminence.--_n.pl._ ALT'ITUDES, passion,
excitement.--_adj._ ALTIT[=U]'DINAL.--_n._ ALTITUDIN[=A]'RIAN, one given to
flightiness in doctrine or belief. [L. _altitudo_--_altus_, high.]

ALTO, alt'o, _n._ (_mus._) properly the same as counter-tenor, the male
voice of the highest pitch (now principally _falsetto_), and not the lowest
female voice, which is properly _contralto_, though in printed music the
second part in a quartet is always called _alto_. [It.--L. _altus_, high.]

ALTOGETHER, awl-too-ge_th_'[.e]r, _adv._ all together: wholly: completely:
without exception.

ALTO-RELIEVO, ALTO-RILIEVO, alt'o-re-l[=e]'vo, _n._ high relief: figures
projected by at least half their thickness from the background on which
they are sculptured. [It. _alto_, high. See RELIEF.]

ALTRUISM, al'tr[=oo]-ism, _n._ the principle of living and acting for the
interest of others.--_adj._ ALTRUIST'IC.--_adv._ ALTRUIST'ICALLY. [Fr.
_altruisme_, formed by Comte from It. _altrui_--L. _alter_, another.]

ALUM, al'um, _n._ a mineral salt, the double sulphate of alumina and
potash, used as a mordant in dyeing and for many purposes.--_adj._
AL'UMISH, having the character or taste of alum.--_ns._ AL'UM-SHALE, or
-SLATE, a slate consisting mainly of clay, iron pyrites, and coaly matter,
from which alum is obtained. [L. _alumen_.]

ALUMINA, al-[=u]'min-a, ALUMINE, al'[=u]-min, _n._ one of the earths, the
characteristic ingredient of common clay--the oxide of aluminium.--_adj._
AL[=U]'MINOUS, containing alum or alumina. [L. _alumen_, alum.]

ALUMINIUM, al-[=u]-min'i-um, _n._ the metallic base of alumina; a metal
somewhat resembling silver, and remarkable for its lightness, now made from
Bauxite.--ALUMINIUM BRONZE, an alloy lighter than gold, but like it in
colour. [First called _Aluminum_ by the discoverer, Sir H. Davy
(1778-1829).]

ALUMNUS, al-um'nus, _n._ one educated at a college is called an _alumnus_
of it:--_pl._ ALUM'NI.--_n._ ALUM'NIATE, the period of pupilage.
[L.,--_al[)e]re_, to nourish.]

ALUNITE, al'un-[=i]t, _n._ a mineral consisting of common alum together
with normal hydrate of aluminium.--Also ALUM-STONE, ALUMIN'ILITE.

ALURE, al-l[=u]r', _n._ (_obs._) a place to walk in, a gallery, a covered
passage. [O. Fr. _aleure_, _aller_, to go.]

ALVEARY, al've-ar-i, _n._ a beehive: (_anat._) the hollow of the external
ear.--_adj._ AL'VEOLATE, pitted like a honeycomb. [L. _alvearium_,
beehive--_alveus_, a hollow vessel.]

ALVEOLAR, al've-o-lar, _adj._ (_anat._) of or belonging to the sockets of
the teeth, as the alveolar arch, the part of the upper jaw in which the
teeth are placed--also AL'VEOLARY.--_n._ AL'VEOLE, the hollow or socket of
a tooth--more common ALV[=E]'OLUS.

ALVINE, al'vin, _adj._ of or from the belly. [From L. _alvus_, belly.]

ALWAYS, awl'w[=a]z, ALWAY, awl'w[=a], _adv._ through all ways: continually:
for ever. [Gen. case of ALWAY.]

AM, am, the 1st pers. sing, of the verb To be. [A.S. _eom_; Gr. _ei-mi_;
Lat. _s-u-m_ (_as_-(_u_)-_mi_); Goth. _-im_; Sans. _as-mi_.]

AMADOU, am'a-d[=oo], _n._ a soft spongy substance, growing as a fungus on
forest trees, used as a styptic and as tinder. [Fr. _amadouer_, to allure
(as in the phrase 'to _coax_ a fire'); prob. of Scand. origin; cf. Norse
_mata_, to feed.]

AMAIN, a-m[=a]n', _adv._ with main force or strength: violently: at full
speed: exceedingly. [Pfx. _a-_ = _on_, and MAIN.]

AMALGAM, a-mal'gam, _n._ a compound of mercury with another metal: any soft
mixture: a combination of various elements: one of the ingredients in an
alloy.--_v.t._ AMAL'GAMATE, to mix mercury with another metal: to
compound.--_v.i._ to unite in an amalgam: to blend.--_n._ AMALGAM[=A]'TION,
the blending of different things: a homogeneous union of diverse
elements.--_adj._ AMALGAM[=A]'TIVE. [L. and Gr. _malagma_, an
emollient--Gr. _malassein_, to soften.]

AMANDINE, am'an-din, _n._ a kind of cold cream prepared from sweet almonds.
[Fr.--_amande_, almond.]

AMANUENSIS, a-man-[=u]-en'sis, _n._ one who writes to dictation: a copyist:
a secretary:--_pl._ AMANUEN'S[=E]S. [L.--_ab_, from, and _manus_, the
hand.]

AMARACUS, a-mar'a-kus, _n._ (_Tennyson_) marjoram. [L.--Gr.]

AMARANTH, -US, am'ar-anth, -us, _n._ a genus of plants with richly-coloured
flowers, that last long without withering, as Love-lies-bleeding, early
employed as an emblem of immortality.--_adj._ AMARANTH'INE, pertaining to
amaranth: unfading. [Through Fr. and L. from Gr. _amarantos_,
unfading--_a_, neg., and root _mar_, to waste away; allied to L. _mori_, to
die.]

AMARYLLIS, am-a-ril'is, _n._ a genus of bulbous-rooted plants, including
the narcissus, jonquil, &c. [_Amaryllis_, the name of a country girl in
Theocritus and Virgil.]

AMASS, a-mas', _v.t._ to gather in large quantity: to accumulate.--_adjs._
AMASS'ABLE.--_pa.p._ AMASSED'.--_n._ AMASS'MENT. [Fr. _amasser_--L. _ad_,
to, and _massa_, a mass.]

AMASTHENIC, am-as-then'ik, _adj._ uniting all the chemical rays of light
into one focus, applied to a lens perfect for photographic purposes. [Gr.
_hama_, together, _sthenos_, force.]

AMATE, a-m[=a]t', _v.t._ to accompany: (_Spens._) to match. [Pfx. _a-_, and
MATE.]

AMATE, a-m[=a]t', _v.t._ (_arch._) to subdue, to daunt, to stupefy. [O. Fr.
_amatir_, to subdue.]

AMATEUR, am'at-[=u]r, or am-at-[=a]r', _n._ one who cultivates a particular
study or art for the love of it, and not professionally: in general terms,
one who plays a game for pleasure, as distinguished from a professional who
plays for money--nearly every game has its special definition to meet its
own requirements.--_adjs._ AMATEUR; AMATEUR'ISH, imperfect and defective,
as the work of an amateur rather than a professional hand.--_adv._
AMATEUR'ISHLY.--_ns._ AMATEUR'ISHNESS; AMATEUR'ISM, AMATEUR'SHIP. [Fr.--L.
_amator_, a lover, _am[=a]re_, to love.]

AMATIVE, am'at-iv, _adj._ relating to love: amorous.--_n._ AM'ATIVENESS,
propensity to love or to sexuality. [From L. _am[=a]re_, -_[=a]tum_, to
love.]

AMATORY, am'at-or-i, _adj._ relating to or causing love:
affectionate.--_adjs._ AM'ATORY, AMAT[=O]'RIAL, AMAT[=O]'RIAN
(_obs._).--_adv._ AMAT[=O]'RIALLY.

AMAUROSIS, am-aw-r[=o]'sis, _n._ total blindness when no change can be seen
in the eye sufficient to account for it; _Amblyopia_ being partial loss of
sight under similar circumstances. The old name was _Gutta serena_--the
'drop serene' of _Paradise Lost_, iii. 25.--_adj._ AMAUR[=O]'TIC. [Gr.
_amaur[=o]sis_, _amauros_, dark.]

AMAZE, a-m[=a]z', _v.t._ to confound with surprise or wonder.--_n._
astonishment: perplexity (much less common than AMAZE'MENT).--_adv._
AMAZ'EDLY, with amazement or wonder.--_n._ AMAZE'MENT, AMAZ'EDNESS
(_rare_), surprise mingled with wonder: astonishment.--_p.adj._ AMAZE'ING,
causing amazement, astonishment: astonishing.--_adv._ AMAZ'INGLY. [Pfx.
_a-_, and MAZE.]

AMAZON, am'az-on, _n._ one of a fabled nation of female warriors: a
masculine woman: a virago.--_adj._ AMAZ[=O]'NIAN, of or like an Amazon: of
masculine manners: warlike. [Popular Gr. ety. from _a_, neg., _mazos_, a
breast--they being fabled to cut off the right breast that they might draw
the bow to its head (of course all this is idle); some have suggested an
original in the Circassian _maza_, the moon.]

AMBAGE, am'b[=a]j, _n._ roundabout phrases: circuitous paths, windings:
dark and mysterious courses:--_pl._ AM'BAGES.--_adj._ AMB[=A]'GIOUS,
circumlocutory: circuitous.--_adv._ AMB[=A]'GIOUSLY.--_n._
AMB[=A]'GIOUSNESS--_adj._ AMB[=A]'GITORY (_rare_).

AMBASSADOR, am-bas'a-dur, _n._ a diplomatic minister of the highest order
sent by one sovereign power to another:--_fem._ AMBASS'ADRESS.--_adj._
AMBASSAD[=O]'RIAL.--_n._ AMBASS'ADORSHIP.--_n._ AMBASS'AGE--now usually
EMBASSAGE, the position, or the business, of an ambassador: a number of men
despatched on an embassy or mission.--AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY, an
ambassador sent on a special occasion, as distinguished from the ordinary
or resident ambassador. [It. _ambasciadore_--L. _ambactus_, derived by
Grimm from Goth. _andbahts_, a servant, whence Ger. _amt_, office; by Zeuss
and others traced to a Celtic source, and identified with W. _amaeth_, a
husbandman.]

AMBE, am'b[=e], _n._ an old mechanical contrivance, ascribed to
Hippocrates, for reducing dislocations of the shoulder. [Gr. _amb[=e]_,
Ionic for _amb[=o]n_, a ridge.]

AMBER, am'b[.e]r, _n._ a yellowish fossil resin, used in making
ornaments.--_adjs._ AM'BERED (_obs._), flavoured with amber or ambergris;
AMB'ERY. [Fr.--Ar. _`anbar_, ambergris.]

AMBERGRIS, am'b[.e]r-gr[=e]s, _n._ a fragrant substance of an ash-gray
colour, found floating on the sea or on the seacoast of warm countries, and
in the intestines of the spermaceti whale. [Fr. _ambre gris_, gray amber.]

AMBERITE, am'be-r[=i]t, _n._ a smokeless powder.

AMBIDEXTER, am-bi-deks't[.e]r, _adj._ and _n._ able to use both hands with
equal facility: double-dealing, or a double-dealer.--_n._ AMBI'DEXTER'ITY,
superior cleverness or adaptability.--_adj._ AMBIDEX'TROUS. [L. _ambo_,
both, _dexter_, right hand.]

AMBIENT, am'bi-ent, _adj._ going round: surrounding: investing.--_n._ an
encompassing sphere: the air or sky. [L. _ambi_, about, _iens_, _ientis_,
pr.p. of _eo_, _[=i]re_, to go.]

AMBIGUOUS, am-big'[=u]-us, _adj._ of doubtful signification: indistinct:
wavering or uncertain: equivocal.--_n._ AMBIG[=U]'ITY, uncertainty or
dubiousness of meaning--also AMBIG'UOUSNESS.--_adv._ AMBIG'UOUSLY. [L.
_ambiguus_--_ambig[)e]re_, to go about--_ambi_, about, _ag[)e]re_, to
drive.]

AMBIT, am'bit, _n._ a circuit: a space surrounding a house or town: extent
of meaning of words, &c.

AMBITION, am-bish'un, _n._ the desire of power, honour, fame,
excellence.--_n._ AMBI'TIONIST (_Carlyle_), an ambitious man.--_adj._
AMBI'TIOUS, full of ambition (with _of_, formerly _for_): strongly desirous
of anything--esp. power: aspiring: indicating ambition: showy or
pretentious.--_adv._ AMBI'TIOUSLY.--_n._ AMBI'TIOUSNESS. [Fr.--L.
_ambition_-_em_, the going about--that is, the canvassing for votes
practised by candidates for office in Rome--_ambi_, about, and _[=i]re_,
_itum_, to go.]

AMBLE, am'bl, _v.i._ to move as a horse by lifting together both legs on
one side alternately with those on the other side: to move at an easy pace
affectedly.--_n._ a pace of a horse between a trot and a walk.--_n._
AM'BLER, a horse that ambles: one who ambles in walking or dancing.--_n._
and _adj._ AM'BLING. [Fr. _ambler_--L. _ambul[=a]-re_, to walk about.]

AMBLYGON, am'bli-gon, _adj._ obtuse-angled. [Gr. _amblus_, obtuse, _gonia_,
angle.]

AMBLYOPIA, am-bli-[=o]'pi-a, _n._ dullness of sight (see AMAUROSIS).--_n._
AMBLYOP'SIS, the bony fish found in the Mammoth Cave of Kentucky, the
rudimentariness of whose eyes is due to darkness and consequent disuse.
[Gr.--_amblys_, dull, _[=o]ps_, eye.]

AMBLYSTOMA, am-blis't[=o]-ma, _n._ a genus of tailed amphibians in the
gill-less or salamandroid sub-order--the adult form of axolotl. [Gr.
_amblys_, blunt, _stoma_, mouth.]

AMBO, am'b[=o], _n._ a kind of reading-desk or pulpit, which in early
Christian churches was placed in the choir. The ambo had two ascents--one
from the east, and the other from the west. [Gr. _amb[=o]n_, a rising.]

AMBROSIA, am-br[=o]'zhi-a, _n._ the fabled food of the gods, which gave
immortal youth and beauty to those who ate it: the anointing oil of the
gods: any finely-flavoured beverage: something delightfully sweet and
pleasing.--_adj._ AMBR[=O]'SIAL, fragrant: delicious: immortal:
heavenly.--_adv._ AMBR[=O]'SIALLY.--_adj._ AMBR[=O]'SIAN, relating to
ambrosia: relating to St Ambrose, bishop of Milan in the 4th century.
[L.--Gr. _ambrosios_ = _ambrotos_, immortal--_a_, neg., and _brotos_,
mortal, for _mrotos_, Sans. _mrita_, dead--_mri_ (L. _mori_), to die.]

[Illustration]

AMBRY, am'bri, _n._ a niche in churches in which the sacred utensils were
kept: a cupboard for victuals. [O. Fr. _armarie_, a repository for arms
(Fr. _armoire_, a cupboard)--L. _armarium_, a chest for arms--_arma_,
arms.]

AMBS-ACE, [=a]mz'-[=a]s, _n._ double ace: the lowest possible throw at
dice: ill-luck: worthlessness. [O. Fr. _ambes as_--L. _ambas as_. See ACE.]

AMBULACRUM, am-b[=u]-l[=a]'krum, _n._ a row of pores in the shell of an
echinoderm, as a sea-urchin, through which the tube-feet protrude.--_adj._
AMBUL[=A]'CRAL. [L., a walk--_ambul[=a]re_, to walk.]

AMBULANCE, am'b[=u]l-ans, _n._ a carriage which follows an army and serves
as a movable hospital for the wounded--also used as an _adj._, as in
ambulance wagon.--_n._ AMBULAN'CIER, a man attached to an
ambulance.--_adj._ AM'BULANT, walking: moving from place to place: (_rare_)
unfixed.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ AM'BULATE (_rare_), to walk.--_p.adj._
AM'BULATING.--_n._ AMBUL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ AM'BULATORY, having the power or
faculty of walking: moving from place to place, not stationary:
mutable.--_n._ any part of a building intended for walking in, as the
aisles of a church, or the cloisters of a monastery: any kind of corridor.
[Fr.--L. _ambulans_, _-antis_, pr.p. of _ambul[=a]re_, to walk about.]

AMBUSCADE, am'busk-[=a]d, _n._ a hiding to attack by surprise: a body of
troops in concealment: the hidden place of ambush--used also as a
_verb_.--_n._ AMBUSC[=A]'DO, a now archaic form of AMBUSCADE (common in
17th century):--_pl._ AMBUSC[=A]'DOES. [Fr. _embuscade_. See AMBUSH.]

AMBUSH, am'boosh, _n._ and _v._ same meanings as AMBUSCADE.--_n._
AM'BUSHMENT (_B._), ambush. [O. Fr. _embusche_ (mod. _embûche_),
_embuscher_, Low L. _embosc[=a]re_--_in_-, in, and _boscus_, a bush.]

AMEER, or AMERE, a-m[=e]r', _n._ a title of honour, also of an independent
ruler in Mohammedan countries. [Ar. _am[=i]r_. See ADMIRAL.]

AMELIORATE, a-m[=e]l'yor-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make better: to improve.--_v.i._
to grow better.--_n._ AMELIOR[=A]'TION, the condition of being made better:
improvement or the means of such.--_adj._ AMEL'IORATIVE. [L. _ad_, to, and
_melior_, better.]

AMEN, [=a]'men', or ä'men', _interj._ so let it be!--_v.t._ to say amen to
anything, to ratify solemnly. [Gr.--Heb. _[=a]m[=e]n_, firm, true.]

AMENABLE, a-m[=e]n'a-bl, _adj._ easy to be led or governed: liable or
subject to.--_ns._ AMENABIL'ITY, AMEN'ABLENESS.--_adv._ AMEN'ABLY. [Fr.
_amener_, to lead--_a_ = L. _ad_, and _mener_, to lead--Low L. _min[=a]re_,
to lead, to drive (as cattle)--L. _min[=a]ri_, to threaten.]

AMENAGE, am'e-n[=a]j, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to manage. [O. Fr. _amenager_. See
MANAGE.]

AMENANCE, am'e-nans, _n._ (_Spens._) conduct, behaviour. [O. Fr.
_amenance_, from root of AMENABLE.]

AMEND, a-mend', _v.t._ to correct: to improve: to alter in detail, as a
bill before parliament, often so fundamentally as to overthrow entirely the
thing originally proposed.--_v.i._ to grow or become better.--_adjs._
AMEND'ABLE, AMEND'ATORY, corrective.--_n._ AMEND'MENT, correction:
improvement: an alteration proposed on a bill under consideration: a
counter-proposal put before a public meeting: a counter-motion.--_n.pl._
AMENDS', supply of a loss: compensation: reparation. [Fr. _amender_ for
_emender_--L. _emend[=a]re_, to remove a fault--_e_, _ex_, out of, and
_menda_, a fault.]

AMENDE, ä-mend', _n._ a fine, penalty.--AMENDE HONORABLE, a public
confession and apology made for any offence. [Fr. See AMEND.]

AMENITY, am-en'i-ti, _n._ pleasantness, as regards situation, climate,
manners, or disposition. [Fr. _aménité_--L. _amoenitas_--_amoenus_,
pleasant, from root of _am_-_[=a]re_, to love.]

AMENORRHOEA, AMENORRHEA, a-men-[=o]-r[=e]'a, _n._ absence of menstruation.
[From Gr. _a_, priv., _m[=e]n_, month, _roia_, a flowing.]

AMENTUM, a-men'tum, AMENT, am'ent, _n._ a scaly sort of spike, as of the
willow: a catkin:--_pl._ AMEN'TA.--_adjs._ AMENT[=A]'CEOUS, AMEN'TAL. [L.
_amentum_, thong.]

AMERCE, a-m[.e]rs', _v.t._ to punish by a fine: to deprive of anything, or
inflict loss upon.--_n._ AMERCE'MENT, a penalty inflicted--also
AMERC'IAMENT. [O. Fr. _amercier_, to impose a fine--L. _merces_, wages,
fine.]

AMERICAN, a-mer'ik-an, _adj._ pertaining to America, esp. to the United
States.--_n._ a native of America.--_v.t._ AMER'ICANISE, to render
American.--_n._ AMER'ICANISM, a custom, characteristic, word, phrase, or
idiom peculiar to Americans: condition of being an American citizen:
devotion to American institutions. [From _America_, so called unfairly from
_Amerigo_ Vespucci, a navigator who explored a small part of South America
seven years after the first voyage of Columbus.]

AMETHYST, a'meth-ist, _n._ a bluish-violet variety of quartz of which
drinking cups used to be made, which the ancients supposed prevented
drunkenness.--_adj._ AMETHYST'INE, [Gr. _amethystos_--_a_, neg.,
_methy-ein_, to be drunken--_meth[=u]_, wine, cog. with Eng. _mead_, Sans.
_madhu_, sweet.]

AMIABLE, [=a]m'i-a-bl, _adj._ lovable: worthy of love: of sweet
disposition.--_ns._ AMIABIL'ITY, AM'IABLENESS, quality of being amiable, or
of exciting love.--_adv._ AM'IABLY. [O. Fr. _amiable_, friendly--L.
_amicabilis_, from _amicus_, a friend; there is a confusion in meaning with
O. Fr. _amable_ (mod. Fr. _aimable_), lovable--L. _amabilis_--_am-[=a]re_,
to love.]

AMIANTUS, a-mi-ant'us, _n._ the finest fibrous variety of asbestos--it can
be made into cloth which when stained is readily cleansed by fire.--Also
AMIANTH'US. [Gr. _amiantos_, unpollutable--_a_, neg.,and _miain-ein_, to
soil.]

AMICABLE, am'ik-a-bl, _adj._ friendly.--_ns._ AMICABIL'ITY,
AM'ICABLENESS.--_adv._ AM'ICABLY. [L. _amicabilis_--_amicus_, a friend,
_am-[=a]re_, to love.]

AMICE, am'is, _n._ a flowing cloak formerly worn by priests and pilgrims: a
strip of fine linen, with a piece of embroidered cloth sewn upon it, worn
formerly on the head, now upon the shoulders, by Roman Catholic priests in
the service of the Mass. [O. Fr. _amit_--L. _amictus_, _amic-[)e]re_, to
wrap about--_amb_, about, and _jac-[)e]re_, to throw.]

AMICE, am'is, _n._ a furred hood with long ends hanging down in front,
originally a cap or covering for the head, afterwards a hood, or cape with
a hood, later a mere college hood. [O. Fr. _aumuce_, of doubtful origin;
but at any rate cog. with Ger. _mutse_, _mütze_, Scot. _mutch_.]

AMID, a-mid', AMIDST, a-midst', _prep._ in the middle or midst:
among.--_adv._ AMID'MOST (_W. Morris_), in the very middle of.--_adv._ and
_n._ AMID'SHIPS, half-way between the stem and stern of a ship, [_a_, on,
and MID.]

AMIDE, am'[=i]d, _n._ one of the compound ammonias derived from one or more
molecules of common ammonia, by exchanging one or more of the three
hydrogen atoms for acid radicals of equivalent acidity.

AMINE, am'[=i]n, _n._ one of the compound ammonias, in which one or more of
the three hydrogen atoms in ammonia are exchanged for alcohol or other
positive radicals, or for a metal.

AMILDAR, am'il-dar, _n._ a factor or manager in India: a collector of
revenue amongst the Mahrattas. [Hind. _`amald[=a]r_--Ar. _`amal_, work.]

AMIR, a-m[=e]r'. Same as AMEER.

AMISS, a-mis', _adj._ in error: wrong.--_adv._ in a faulty manner.--_n._
AMISS'IBILITY.--_adjs._ AMISS'IBLE; AMISS'ING, wanting, lost. [_a_, on, and
MISS, failure.]

AMITY, am'i-ti, _n._ friendship: good-will. [Fr. _amitié_--_ami_--L.
_amicitia_, friendship, _amicus_, a friend. See AMICABLE.]

AMMIRAL, an old spelling of ADMIRAL.

AMMONIA, am-m[=o]n'i-a, _n._ a pungent gas yielded by smelling-salts,
burning feathers, &c.: a solution of ammonia in water (properly _liquid
ammonia_): a name of a large series of compounds, analogous to ammonia,
including _amines_, _amides_, and _alkalamides_.--_adjs._ AMMON'IAC,
AMMON[=I]'ACAL, pertaining to, or having the properties of, ammonia.--_ns._
AMMON'IAC, AMMON[=I]'ACUM, a whitish gum resin of bitter taste and heavy
smell, the inspissated juice of a Persian umbelliferous plant--used in
medicine for its stimulant and expectorant qualities; AMMON'IAPHONE, an
instrument invented about 1880, said to improve the quality of the singing
and speaking voice, being an apparatus for inhaling peroxide of hydrogen
and free ammonia.--_adj._ AMM[=O]N'IATED, containing ammonia.--_n._
AMMON'IUM, the hypothetical base of ammonia. [From _sal-ammoniac_, or
smelling-salts, first obtained by heating camel's dung in Libya, near the
temple of Jupiter Ammon.]

AMMONITE, am'mon-[=i]t, _n._ the fossil shell of an extinct genus of
molluscs, so called because they resemble the horns on the statue of
Jupiter Ammon, worshipped as a ram.

AMMUNITION, am-m[=u]n-ish'un, _n._ anything used for munition or defence:
military stores, formerly of all kinds (as still in the word used
adjectively, as in ammunition wagon, &c.), now esp. powder, balls, bombs,
&c.--_v.t._ to supply with ammunition. [O. Fr. _amunition_. See MUNITION.]

AMNESIA, am-n[=e]'si-a, _n._ loss of memory. [Gr. _amnesia_]

AMNESTY, am'nest-i, _n._ a general pardon of political offenders: an act of
oblivion.--_v.t._ to give amnesty to. [Gr. _a-mnestos_, not remembered.]

AMNION, am'ni-on, _n._ the innermost membrane enveloping the embryo of
reptiles, birds, and mammals. [Gr.--_amnos_, a lamb.]

AMOEBA, a-m[=e]b'a, _n._ a name given to a number of the simplest animals
or Protozoa, which consist of unit masses of living matter. They flow out
in all directions in blunt processes (_pseudopodia_, 'false feet'), and
have thus an endlessly varying form, hence the name:--_pl._
AMOEB'Æ.--_adjs._ AMOEB'IFORM, AMOEB'OID. [Gr. _amoib[=e]_, change.]

AMOEBÆAN, am-e-b[=e]'an, _adj._ answering alternately, responsive, as in
some of Virgil's eclogues. [L.--Gr. _amoibaios_, _amoib[=e]_, change,
alternation.]

AMOMUM, a-m[=o]'mum, _n._ a genus of herbaceous tropical plants (nat. ord.
_Scitamineæ_), allied to the ginger-plant, several species yielding the
cardamoms and grains of paradise of commerce. [Gr. _am[=o]mon_.]

AMONG, a-mung', AMONGST, a-mungst', _prep._ of the number of: amidst. [A.S.
_on-gemang_--_mengan_, to mingle.]

AMONTILLADO, a-mon-til-yä'do, _n._ a dry or little sweet kind of sherry of
a light colour and body. [Sp.]

AMORET, am'or-et, _n._ (_obs._) a sweetheart. [O. Fr. _amorette_--L.
_amor-em_.]

AMORETTO, am-or-et'to, _n._ a lover: a cupid:--_pl._ AMORET'TI. [It.]

AMORNINGS, a-morn'ingz, _adv._ (_obs._) of mornings. [OF and MORNING.]

AMOROSO, am-or-ro'so, _adj._ (_mus._) tender: descriptive of love.--_n._
one in love, a gallant:--_pl._ AMOR[=O]'SI.--_n._ AMOR[=O]'SITY (_rare_),
fondness.

AMOROUS, am'or-us, _adj._ easily inspired with love: fondly in love (with
_of_): relating to love.--_n._ AM'ORIST, a lover: a gallant.--_adv._
AM'OROUSLY.--_n._ AM'OROUSNESS. [O. Fr. _amorous_ (Fr. _amoureux_)--L.
_amoros-um_, _amor_, love.]

AMORPHA, a-mor'fa, _n._ a genus of North American shrubs of the bean
family, the false indigoes or lead-plants--also _bastard_ or _wild indigo_.

AMORPHISM, a-mor'fizm, _n._ a state of being amorphous or without
crystallisation even in the minutest particles.--_adj._ AMOR'PHOUS, without
regular shape, shapeless, uncrystallised. [Gr. _a_, neg., _morph[=e]_,
form.]

AMORT, a-mort', _adj._ (_obs._ or _arch._ merely) spiritless,
dejected.--_n._ AMORTIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ AMORT'[=I]SE, to alienate in
mortmain: to convey to a corporation:--_pr.p._ amort'[=i]sing; _pa.p._
amort'[=i]sed. [Fr. _à_, to, _mort_, death. See MORTAL.]

AMOUNT, a-mownt', _v.i._ to mount or rise to: to result in: to come in
meaning or substance to (with _to_).--_n._ the whole sum: the effect or
result. [O. Fr. _amonter_, to ascend--L. _ad_, to, _mont_, _mons_, a
mountain.]

AMOUR, am-[=oo]r', _n._ a love intrigue, or illicit affection: a love
affair (humorously only, for the old innocent sense is now obsolete).--_n._
AMOURETTE', a petty love affair: the love-grass, or quaking-grass: a
cupid.--AMOUR PROPRE, self-esteem ready to take offence at slights.
[Fr.--L. _amor_, love.]

AMOVE, a-m[=oo]v', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to stir up: to affect:--_pr.p._
amov'ing; _pa.p._ amoved'. [L. _admov[=e]re_--_ad_, to, and _mov-[=e]re_,
to move.]

AMOVE, a-m[=oo]v', _v.t._ to remove, esp. from a place (obsolete except in
law). [O. Fr. _amover_--L. _amov[=e]re_, _ab_, from, _mov-[=e]re_, to
move.]

AMPÈRE, am-pehr', _n._ in electricity, unit of current. [From _Ampère_, a
French electrician who died in 1836.]

AMPERSAND, am'p[.e]rs-and, _n._ a name formerly in use for the character
_&_ (also called _short and_), commonly placed at the end of the alphabet
in primers.--Also AM'PERZAND, AM'PUSSY-AND, and simply AM'PASSY. [A corr.
of _and per se and_--that is, _&_ standing by itself means _and_.]

AMPHIBALUS, am-fib'a-lus, _n._ an ecclesiastical vestment like the
chasuble. [L.--Gr., from _amphi_, around, _ball-ein_, to cast.]

AMPHIBIA, am-fib'i-a, AMPHIBIALS, AMPHIBIANS, _n.pl._ animals capable of
living both under water and on land.--_n._ AMPHIB'IAN.--_adj._ AMPHIB'IOUS.
[L.--Gr., from _amphi_, both, _bios_, life.]

AMPHIBOLE, am-fib'ol-[=e], _n._ the name of a group of minerals which are
essentially silicates of lime and magnesia, but these bases are often
partly replaced by alumina, and oxides of iron and manganese--tremolite,
nephrite (jade), and hornblende. [Gr.]

AMPHIBOLOGY, am-fib-ol'o-ji, _n._ the use of ambiguous phrases or such as
can be construed in two senses. A good example is Shakespeare's 'The duke
yet lives that Henry shall depose' (2 _Henry VI._, I. iv. 33)--also
AMPHIB'OLY.--_adjs._ AMPHIB'OLOUS, AMPHIBOL'IC. [Gr., from _amphi_, on both
sides, _ball-ein_, to throw.]

AMPHIBRACH, am'fi-brak, _n._ in prosody, a foot of three syllables--a
short, a long, and a short, as _[)a]m[=a]r[)e]_. The name is sometimes
applied in English to such a word as _amusement_, where an accented
syllable falls between two unaccented. [L.--Gr., made up of Gr. _amphi_, on
each side, _brachys_, short.]

AMPHICTYONIC, am-fik-ti-on'ik, _adj._ The Amphictyonic Council was an old
Greek assembly composed of deputies (Amphictyons) from twelve of the
leading states.--_n._ AMPHIC'TYONY, an association of such states. [Gr.
_amphiktyones_, 'those dwelling around.']

AMPHIMACER, am-fim'a-s[.e]r, _n._ in prosody, a foot of three syllables,
the middle one short, and the first and last long, as _c[=a]r[)i]t[=a]s_.
Sometimes applied to such Eng. words as _runaway_. [Gr., 'long at both
ends;' _amphi_, on both sides, _makros_, long.]

AMPHIOXUS, am-f[=i]-oks'us, _n._ the lancelet, one of the lowest backboned
animals, found on the sandy coasts of warm and temperate seas. The body is
about two inches long and pointed at both ends. [Gr. _amphi_, on both
sides, and _oxys_, sharp.]

AMPHIPODS, am'fi-pods, _n._ an order of small sessile-eyed crustaceans--a
familiar example is the sand-hopper. [Gr. _amphi_, both ways, _pous_,
_podos_, a foot.]

AMPHISBÆNA, am-fis-b[=e]'na, _n._ a family of lizard-snakes, chiefly found
in tropical America, which have their tails so rounded as to give them the
appearance of having a head at both ends.--_adj._ AMPHISB[=E]'NIC. [Gr.
_amphisbaina_--_amphi_, _amphis_, both ways, and _bain-ein_, to go.]

AMPHISCIANS, am-fish'i-anz, _n.pl._ the inhabitants of the torrid zone,
whose shadows are thrown both ways--that is, to the north one part of the
year, and to the south the other part, according as the sun is north or
south of the equator. [Gr. _amphiskios_--_amphi_, both ways, _skia_, a
shadow.]

AMPHISTOMOUS, am-fis't[=o]-mus, _adj._ having a mouth-like orifice at
either end, as some parasitic worms. [Gr., _amphistomos_, double mouthed.]

AMPHITHEATRE, am-fi-th[=e]'a-t[.e]r, _n._ an oval or circular edifice
having rows of seats one above another, around an open space, called the
arena, in which public spectacles are exhibited: anything like an
amphitheatre in form.--_adjs._ AMPHITHEAT'RICAL, AMPHITHEAT'RAL.--_adv._
AMPHITHEAT'RICALLY. [Gr. _amphi_, round about, _theatron_, a place for
seeing--_theaomai_, to see.]

AMPHITRYON, am-fit'ri-on, _n._ a host or entertainer. [From _Amphitryon_ in
Molière's comedy, who gives a great dinner. Amphitryon in Gr. mythology was
husband of Alcmene, who was deceived by Zeus in her husband's semblance,
and so became the mother of Hercules.]

[Illustration]

AMPHORA, am'f[=o]-ra, _n._ a two-handled vessel or jar used by the Greeks
and Romans for holding liquids.--_adj._ AM'PHORIC (_med._), like the sound
produced by speaking into an amphora or any large vessel with a small
mouth. [Gr. _amphoreus_, _amphiphoreus_--_amphi_, on both sides,
_pher-ein_, to bear.]

AMPLE, am'pl, _adj._ spacious: large enough: abundant: liberal: copious, or
of great length.--_ns._ AM'PLENESS; AMPLI[=A]'TION, enlarging, an
enlargement.--_adj._ AMPLI[=A]'TIVE (_rare_).--_adv._ AM'PLY. [Fr.--L.
_amplus_, large.]

AMPLEXICAUL, am-pleks'i-kawl, _adj._ (_bot._) nearly surrounding the
stem--said of sessile leaves. [Modern L. _amplexicaulis_--L. _amplexus_,
embrace, and _caulis_, stem.]

AMPLIFY, am'pli-f[=i], _v.t._ to make more copious in expression: to add
to.--_n._ AMPLIFIC[=A]'TION, enlargement.--_adj._ AMPLIFIC[=A]'TORY.--_n._
AM'PLIFIER, one who amplifies: a lens which enlarges the field of vision.
[L. _amplus_, large, and _fac-[)e]re_, to make.]

AMPLITUDE, am'pli-t[=u]d, _n._ largeness: abundance: width: splendour: wide
range of mind: the distance from the east point of a horizon at which a
heavenly body rises, or from the west point at which it sets. [Fr.--L.
_amplitudo_.]

AMPUL, am'pul, _n._ a small earthenware or glass vessel of an oblong
globular form, used for containing consecrated oil or wine and water for
the eucharistic service--now more commonly AMPUL'LA. [O. Fr. _ampole_--L.
_ampulla_.]

[Illustration]

AMPULLA, am-pul'la, _n._ a small two-handled flask or bottle for holding
liquids or unguents: a vessel for holding consecrated oil or chrism, esp.
at the coronation of kings: a kind of cruet of transparent glass for
holding the wine and water used at the altar: (_biol._) the dilated end of
any canal or duct in an animal body, also the spongiole of a root in
plants.--_adjs._ AMPULL[=A]'CEOUS, AM'PULLAR, AM'PULLARY, AM'PULLATE.--_n._
AMPULLOS'ITY, turgidity of language, bombast. [L.; made up of _amb_, on
both sides, and _olla_, a jar; or an irregular dim. of _amphora_, a
flagon.]

AMPUTATE, am'p[=u]t-[=a]t, _v.t._ to cut off, as a limb of an animal.--_n._
AMPUT[=A]'TION. [L. _amb_, round about, _put[=a]re_, to cut.]

AMRITA, am-r[=e]'ta, _n._ the drink of the gods in Hindu mythology. [Sans.]

AMUCK, a-muk', _adv._ madly: in murderous frenzy--hardly ever used save in
the phrase 'to run _amuck_.' [Malay, _amoq_, intoxicated or excited to
madness.]

AMULET, am'[=u]-let, _n._ a gem, scroll, or other object carried about the
person, as a charm against sickness, harm, or witchcraft. [Fr.--L.
_amul[=e]tum_, a word of unknown origin; curiously like the mod. Ar.
_himalat_, lit. 'a carrier,' applied to a shoulder-belt, by which a small
Koran is hung on the breast.]

AMUSE, a-m[=u]z', _v.t._ to occupy pleasantly: to divert: to beguile with
expectation: (_obs._) occupy the attention with: (_arch._) to
beguile.--_adj._ AMUS'ABLE, capable of being amused.--_n._ AMUSE'MENT, that
which amuses: pastime.--_adj._ AMUS'ING, affording amusement:
entertaining.--_adv._ AMUS'INGLY.--_n._ AMUS'INGNESS.--_adj._ AMUS'IVE
(_rare_), having the power to amuse or entertain.--_n._ AMUS'IVENESS. [Fr.
_amuser_.]

AMUSETTE, am-[=u]-z[.e]t', _n._ a light field-gun invented by Marshal Saxe.
[Fr.]

AMUTTER, a-mut'[.e]r, _adv._ in a muttering state.

AMYGDALATE, a-mig'da-l[=a]t, _adj._ pertaining to, like, or made of
almonds.--_adj._ AMYGDAL[=A]'CEOUS, akin to the almond. [L. _amygdala_--Gr.
_amygdal[=e]_, an almond.]

AMYGDALIN, AMYGDALINE, a-mig'da-lin, _n._ a crystalline principle existing
in the kernel of bitter almonds.

AMYGDALOID, a-mig'da-loid, _n._ a variety of basaltic rock containing
almond-shaped nodules of other minerals, as quartz, felspar.--_adj._
AMYGDALOI'DAL. [Gr. _amygdal[=e]_, and _eidos_, form.]

AMYL, am'il, _n._ the fifth in the series of the alcohol radicals, a
natural product of the distillation of coal. As thus found, two molecules
are united together, usually called _diamyl_, being a colourless liquid
with an agreeable smell and burning taste.--_n._ AM'YLENE. [Gr. _amylon_,
starchy, fine meal.]

AMYLACEOUS, am-i-l[=a]'shus, _adj._ pertaining to or resembling starch. [L.
_amylum_, starch--Gr. _amylon_.]

AMYLOID, am'i-loid, _n._ a half-gelatinous substance like starch, found in
some seeds.--_adj._ AMYLOID'AL. [Gr. _amylon_, the finest flour, starch;
lit. 'unground'--_a_, neg., _myl[=e]_, a mill, and _eidos_, form.]

AN, an, _adj._ one: the indefinite article, used before words beginning
with the sound of a vowel. [A.S. _[=a]n_. See ONE.]

AN, an, _conj._ if. [A form of AND.]

ANA, [=a]'na, a suffix to names of persons or places, denoting a collection
of memorable sayings, items of gossip, or miscellaneous facts, as
_Johnsoniana_, _Tunbrigiana_, &c.: applied also to the literature of some
special subject, as _Boxiana_, _Burnsiana_, _Shakespeariana_.--_n.pl._
specially a collection of the table-talk of some one. [The neut. pl.
termination of L. adjectives in _-anus_ = pertaining to.]

ANABAPTIST, an-a-bapt'ist, _n._ one who holds that baptism ought to be
administered only to adults (by immersion), and therefore that those
baptised in infancy ought to be baptised again.--The name is disclaimed by
recent opponents of infant baptism both in England and the
Continent.--_v.i._ ANABAP'TISE.--_n._ ANABAPT'ISM.--_adj._ ANABAPTIST'IC.
[Gr. _ana_, again, _baptiz-ein_, to dip in water, to baptise.]

ANABASIS, an-ab'a-sis, _n._ a military advance into the interior of a
country--specially the title of the famous story of the unfortunate
expedition of Cyrus the Younger against his brother Artaxerxes, and of the
retreat of his 10,000 Greek allies under the conduct of Xenophon. [Gr.;
made up of _ana_, up, and _bain-ein_, to go.]

ANABLEPS, an'a-bleps, _n._ a genus of bony fishes with open air-bladders,
and projecting eyes divided into an upper and lower portion, so that each
eye has two pupils. [Gr. _anablepsis_, 'a looking up.']

ANABOLISM, an-ab'ol-izm, _n._ the constructive processes within the
protoplasm, by which food or other material, at a relatively low level,
passes through an ascending series of ever more complex and unstable
combinations, till it is finally worked up into living matter. [Gr.
_anabol[=e]_, 'rising up.']

ANACANTHOUS, an-a-kan'thus, _adj._ without spine. [Gr. _an-_, without,
_akantha_, spine.]

ANACARD, an'a-kard, _n._ the cashew-nut, the fruit of the _Anacardium
occidentale_. [Gr., made up of _ana_, according to, and _kardia_, heart,
from the shape of the fruit.]

ANACATHARSIS, an-a-kath-ar'sis, _n._ vomiting or expectoration.--_n._
ANACATHAR'TIC, a medicine with this effect--expectorants, emetics,
sternutatorics, &c. [Gr.; made up of _ana_, up, and _kathair-ein_, to
cleanse.]

ANACHARIS, an-ak'ar-is, _n._ a North American weed found in ponds and slow
streams, which was first found in Britain in 1842, and is now very
troublesome in the Trent, Derwent, and other rivers. [Made up of Gr. _ana_,
up, and _charis_, grace.]

ANACHORISM, a-nak'[=o]-rizm, _n._ (_rare_) something incongruous with the
spirit of the country. [Coined on the analogy of _anachronism_, from Gr.
_ana_, back, and _ch[=o]rion_, country, with suff. _ism_.]

ANACHRONISM, an-a'kron-izm, _n._ an error in regard to time, whereby a
thing is assigned to an earlier or to a later age than it belongs to:
anything out of keeping with the time.--_v.t._ ANA'CHRONISE.--_n._
ANA'CHRONIST.--_adjs._ ANACHRONIST'IC, ANA'CHRONOUS.--_adv._
ANA'CHRONOUSLY. [Gr. _ana_, backwards, _chronos_, time.]

ANACLASTIC, an-a-klas'tik, _adj._ pertaining to refraction: bending back.
[Gr. _ana_, back, _klaein_, break off.]

ANACOLUTHON, an-a-ko-l[=u]'thon, _n._ want of sequence in the construction
of a sentence, when the latter part does not grammatically correspond with
the former: a sentence exhibiting an ANACOLUTHIA, or the passing from one
construction to another before the former is completed. [Gr.
_anakolouthos_--_a_, _an_, neg., and _akolouthos_, following.]

ANACONDA, an-a-kon'da, _n._ a large South American water-snake of the
Python family, closely related to the boa-constrictor. [Singhalese (?).]

ANACREONTIC, an-a-kre-ont'ik, _adj._ after the manner of the Greek poet
Anacreon: free, convivial, erotic.--_n._ a poem in this vein.--_adv._
ANACREONT'ICALLY.

ANACRUSIS, an-a-kr[=oo]'sis, _n._ (_pros._) an upward beat at the beginning
of a verse, consisting of one or two unaccented syllables introductory to
the just rhythm. [Gr. from _ana_, up, _krou-ein_, to strike.]

ANADEM, an'a-dem, _n._ a band or fillet bound round the head: a wreath or
chaplet of flowers. [Gr. _anad[=e]ma_--_ana_, up, and _de-ein_, to bind.]

ANADROMOUS, an-ad'r[=o]-mus, _adj._ ascending rivers to spawn. [Gr. _ana_,
up, _dromos_, running.]

ANÆMIA, an-[=e]m'i-a, _n._ a term employed to denote those conditions in
which there is a deficiency of blood or of its red corpuscles: lack or
poverty of blood marked by paleness and languor.--_adj._ ANÆM'IC. [Gr.;
made up of _an_, neg., _haima_, blood.]

ANAEROBIA, an-[=a]-[.e]r-[=o]'bi-a, _n.pl._ (_biol._) bacteria which
flourish without free oxygen.--_adj._ ANAER[=O]'BIC.

ANÆSTHETIC, an-[=e]s-thet'ik, _adj._ producing insensibility to external
impressions.--_n._ a substance, as chloroform or cocaine, that produces
insensibility, whether general or local.--_ns._ ANÆSTH[=E]'SIA,
ANÆSTH[=E]'SIS, loss of feeling, insensibility.--_adv._
ANÆSTHET'ICALLY.--_v.t._ ANÆS'THETISE. [Gr. _a_, _an_, neg.,
_aisth[=e]sis_, sensation--_aisthanomai_, to feel.]

ANAGLYPH, an'a-glif, _n._ an ornament carved in low relief.--_adj._
ANAGLYPT'IC. [Gr.; _ana_, up, _glyph-ein_, to carve.]

ANAGLYPTOGRAPHY, an-a-glip-tog'ra-fi, _n._ the art of engraving so as to
give the subject the appearance of being raised from the surface of the
paper as if embossed--used in representing coins, &c. [Gr. _anaglyptos_,
embossed, and _graphia_, writing.]

ANAGOGY, an'a-goj-i, _n._ the mystical interpretation or hidden sense of
words.--_adjs._ ANAGOG'IC, ANAGOG'ICAL.--_adv._ ANAGOG'ICALLY. [Gr.
_anag[=o]g[=e]_, elevation, _an-ag-ein_, to lift up.]

ANAGRAM, an'a-gram, _n._ a word or sentence formed by rewriting (in a
different order) the letters of another word or sentence: as, 'live' =
'evil,' 'Quid est veritas? = 'Est vir qui adest,' and 'Florence
Nightingale' = 'Flit on, cheering angel.'--Many pseudonyms are merely
anagrams, as 'Voltaire' = 'Arouet l. i.'--that is, 'Arouet le jeune (the
younger).'--_adjs._ ANAGRAMMAT'IC, ANAGRAMMAT'ICAL.--_adv._
ANAGRAMMAT'ICALLY.--_v.t._ ANAGRAM'MAT[=I]SE, to transpose, so as to form
an anagram.--_ns._ ANAGRAM'MATISM, the practice of making anagrams;
ANAGRAM'MATIST, a maker of anagrams. [Gr. _ana_, again, _graph-ein_, to
write.]

ANAGRAPH, an'a-graf, _n._ a catalogue or inventory: a description. [Gr.
_anagraph[=e]_--_ana_, up, out, _graph-ein_, to write.]

ANAL, [=a]n'al, _adj._ pertaining to or near the anus.

ANALECTS, an'a-lekts, _n.pl._ collections of literary fragments--also
ANALEC'TA.--_adj._ ANALEC'TIC. [Gr. _analektos_--_analegein_, to
collect--_ana_, up, _legein_, to gather.]

ANALEPTIC, an-a-lep'tik, _adj._ restorative: comforting. [Gr.
_anal[=e]ptikos_, restorative--_anal[=e]psis_, recovery--_ana_, up, and
_lamban[=o]_, _l[=e]psomai_, to take.]

ANALGESIA, an-al-j[=e]'zi-a, _n._ painlessness, insensibility to pain. [Gr.
_an-_, priv., and _algein_, to feel pain.]

ANALOGY, an-al'o-ji, _n._ an agreement or correspondence in certain
respects between things otherwise different--a resemblance of relations, as
in the phrase, 'Knowledge is to the mind what light is to the eye:'
relation in general: likeness: (_geom._) proportion or the equality of
ratios: (_gram._) the correspondence of a word or phrase with the genius of
a language, as learned from the manner in which its words and phrases are
ordinarily formed: similarity of derivative or inflectional
processes.--_adjs._ ANALOG'ICAL, ANAL'OGIC.--_adv._ ANALOG'ICALLY.--_v.t._
ANAL'OGISE, to explain or consider by analogy:--_pr.p._ anal'og[=i]sing;
_pa.p._ anal'og[=i]sed.--_ns._ ANAL'OGISM (_obs._), investigation by
analogy: argument from cause to effect; ANAL'OGIST, one who adheres to
analogy; ANAL'OGON = analogue.--_adj._ ANAL'OGOUS, having analogy: bearing
some correspondence with or resemblance to: similar in certain
circumstances or relations (with _to_).--_adv._ ANAL'OGOUSLY.--_ns._
ANAL'OGOUSNESS; AN'ALOGUE, a word or body bearing analogy to, or
resembling, another: (_biol._) a term used to denote physiological,
independent of morphological resemblance.--Organs are _analogous_ to one
another, or are _analogues_, when they perform the same function, though
they may be altogether different in structure; as the wings of a bird and
the wings of an insect. Again, organs are _homologous_, or _homologues_,
when they are constructed on the same plan, undergo a similar development,
and bear the same relative position, and this independent of either form or
function. Thus the arms of a man and the wings of a bird are homologues of
one another, while the wing of a bird and the wing of a bat are both
analogous and homologous. [Gr. _ana_, according to, and _logos_, ratio.]

ANALPHABETE, an-al'fa-b[=e]t, _n._ and _adj._ one who does not know his
alphabet, an illiterate.--_adj._ ANALPHABET'IC. [Gr. _an_, neg., and
ALPHABET.]

ANALYSIS, an-al'is-is, _n._ a resolving or separating a thing into its
elements or component parts--the tracing of things to their source, and so
discovering the general principles underlying individual phenomena. Its
converse is _synthesis_, the explanation of certain phenomena by means of
principles which are for this purpose assumed as established. Analysis as
the resolution of our experience into its original elements, is an
artificial separation; while synthesis is an artificial reconstruction:
(_gram._) the arrangement into its logical and grammatical elements of a
sentence or part of a sentence:--_pl._ ANAL'YSES.--_adj._
ANALYS'ABLE.--_n._ ANALYS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ AN'ALYSE, to resolve a whole
into its elements: to separate into component parts.--_n._ AN'ALYST, one
skilled in analysis, esp. chemical analysis.--_adjs._ ANALYT'IC, -AL,
pertaining to analysis: resolving into first principles.--_adv._
ANALYT'ICALLY.--_n.pl._ ANALYT'ICS, the name given by Aristotle to his
treatises on logic.--ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY, geometry treated by means of
ordinary algebra, with a reference, direct or indirect, to a system of
co-ordinates; ANALYTIC METHOD (_logic_) proceeds regressively or
inductively to the recognition of general principles, as opposed to the
_Synthetic_ method, which advances from principles to particulars. [Gr.
_analysis_, _analy-ein_, to unloose, _ana_, up, _ly-ein_, to loose.]

ANAMNESIS, an-am-n[=e]s'is, _n._ the recalling of things past to memory:
the recollection of the Platonic pre-existence: the history of his illness
given by the patient to his physician. [Gr.]

ANAMORPHOSIS, an-a-mor'fo-sis, _n._ a figure, appearing from one view-point
irregular or deformed, but from another regular and in proportion: (_bot._)
a gradual transformation, or an abnormal development of any part.--_adj._
ANAMOR'PHOUS. [Gr.; _ana_, back, _morph[=o]sis_, a shaping--_morph[=e]_,
shape.]

ANANAS, an-an'as, _n._ the pine-apple: the West Indian penguin.--Also
ANAN'A. [Peruvian.]

ANANDROUS, an-an'drus, _adj._ without stamens, or male organs, applied to
female flowers. [Gr. _an_, neg., and _an[=e]r_, _andros_, a man.]

ANANTHEROUS, an-an'th[.e]r-us, _adj._ without anthers. [Gr. _an_, neg., and
ANTHER.]

ANANTHOUS, an-an'thus, _adj._ without flowers. [Gr. _an_, neg., and
_anthos_, a flower.]

ANAPÆST, ANAPEST, an'a-pest, _n._ (in verse) a foot consisting of three
syllables, two short and the third long, or (in Eng.) two unaccented and
the third accented, as _colonnadé_--a familiar example of a poem in this
metre is Byron's _Destruction of Sennacherib_.--_adjs._ ANAPÆS'TIC, -AL.
[Gr. _anapaistos_, reversed, because it is the dactyl reversed.]

ANAPHORA, an'af-or-a, _n._ (_rhet._) the repetition of the same word or
phrase in several successive clauses, as in 1 Cor. i. 20. [Gr.; _ana_,
back, _pher-ein_, to bear.]

ANAPHRODISIAC, an-af-r[=o]-diz'i-ak, _adj._ and _n._ tending to diminish
sexual desire, or a drug supposed to have that effect. [Fr. _an_, neg., and
adj. from APHRODITE.]

ANAPLASTY, an'a-plas-ti, _n._ the reparation of superficial lesions by the
use of adjacent healthy tissue, as by transplanting a portion of
skin.--_adj._ AN'APLASTIC. [Gr.; that may be formed anew, _ana_, again,
_plass-ein_, to form.]

ANAPLEROSIS, an'a-pl[=e]-r[=o]'sis, _n._ the filling up of a deficiency,
esp. in medicine: the filling up of parts that have been destroyed, as in
wounds, cicatrices, &c.--_adj._ ANAPLEROT'IC. [Gr.; from _ana_, up, and
_pl[=e]ro-ein_, to fill up.]

ANAPTOTIC, an-ap-tot'ik, _adj._ (_philol._) again uninflected--a term
sometimes applied to languages which have lost most of their inflections
through phonetic decay. [Gr. _ana_, again, _apt[=o]tos_, without case,
indeclinable, _apt[=o]s_, _-[=o]tos_, not falling, _pipt-ein_, to fall.]

ANARCHY, an'ark-i, _n._ the want of government in a state: political
confusion: conflict of opinion.--_adjs._ ANARCH'AL (_rare_); ANARCH'IC,
ANARCH'ICAL.--_v.t._ ANARCH'ISE.--_ns._ AN'ARCHISM, anarchy: the negation
of government--the name adopted by a phase of revolutionary socialism
associated with the names of Proudhon and Bakunin. Their ideal of society
was of one without government of any kind, when every man should be a law
unto himself; AN'ARCHIST, AN'ARCH, one who promotes anarchy. [Gr. _a_,
_an_, neg., _arch[=e]_, government.]

ANARTHROUS, an-är'thrus, _adj._ without the article, of Greek nouns:
(_entom._) having neither wings nor legs.--_adv._ ANAR'THROUSLY. [Gr. _an_,
neg., _arthron_, a joint, the article.]

ANASTATIC, an-a-stat'ik, _adj._ furnished with characters standing up, or
raised in relief--esp. of the anastatic printing process, in which copies
of drawings are printed from fac-similes produced in relief on zinc plates.
[Gr. _anastatikos_--_ana_, up, _statikos_, causing to stand--_hist[=e]mi_,
to make to stand.]

ANASTOMOSIS, an-as-to-m[=o]'sis, _n._ the union or intercommunication of
vessels with each other, as seen in the junction of the branches of the
arteries.--_v.i._ ANAS'TOMOSE, to communicate in such a way.--_adj._
ANASTOMOT'IC.

ANASTROPHE, an-as'tro-fi, _n._ an inversion of the natural order of words,
as 'Loud roared the thunder,' for 'The thunder roared,' &c. [Gr.; _ana_,
back, and _streph-ein_, to turn.]

ANATHEMA, an-ath'em-a, _n._ a solemn ecclesiastical curse or denunciation
involving excommunication: any person or thing anathematised: generally,
any imprecation or expression of execration.--_n._
ANATHEMATIS[=A]'TION--_v.t._ ANATH'EMATISE, to pronounce
accursed.--ANATHEMA MARAN[=A]THA, as in 1 Cor. xvi. 22; _maranatha_ (Syr.
_m[=a]ran eth[=a]_, 'our Lord hath come') is properly a mere solemn formula
of confirmation, like _Amen_, having no other connection with the
antecedent _anathema_--it is so printed in the Revised Version.--It seems
to have been used by the early Christians as a kind of watchword of mutual
encouragement and hope. So the words in 1 Cor. xvi. 22 are nearly
equivalent to the similar expressions in Phil. iv. 5; Rev. xxii. 20. [The
classical Gr. _anath[=e]ma_ meant a votive offering set up in a temple,
_ana_, up, _tithenai_, to place; the _anath[)e]ma_ of the Septuagint and
New Testament meant something specially devoted to evil, as in Rom. ix. 3.]

ANATOMY, an-a'tom-i, _n._ the art of dissecting any organised body: science
of the structure of the body learned by dissection: a skeleton, a
shrivelled and shrunken body, a mummy: (_fig._) the lifeless form or shadow
of anything: humorously for the body generally: the detailed analysis of
anything, as in Burton's famous treatise, _The Anatomy of
Melancholy_.--_adjs._ ANATOM'IC, -AL, relating to anatomy.--_adv._
ANATOM'ICALLY.--_v.t._ ANAT'OMISE, to dissect a body: (_fig._) to lay open
minutely.--_n._ ANAT'OMIST, one skilled in anatomy. [Gr. _ana_, up,
asunder, _temnein_, to cut.]

ANATOPISM, an-at'op-izm, _n._ (_rare_--_Coleridge_) a faulty arrangement.
[Gr. _ana_, up, _topos_, a place.]

ANATTA, an-at'ta, _n._ the reddish pulp surrounding the seeds of the _Bixa
orellana_, a medium-sized tree growing in Guiana and elsewhere. It yields a
dye which gives a bright orange tint to cloth, and is much used to add
colour to butter and cheese.--Also ANAT'TO, ANNAT'TO, ARNOT'TO. [Supposed
to be a native Amer. word.]

ANBURY, an'b[.e]r-i, _n._ a disease in turnips, produced by one of the
slime-fungi, and usually the result of improper cultivation. It is often
confounded with _Finger-and-toe_ (_dactylorhiza_), which is rather a
degeneration of the plant than a disease, the bulb branching out into a
number of taproots, while the skin remains unbroken. Anbury causes a
scabbed and broken skin, and tubercular growths on the roots and at the
base of the bulb. [Often explained as a disguised form of A.S. _ampre_, a
crooked swelling vein; more probably, a variant of _anbury_ = _angberry_,
A.S. _ang-_, pain, as in _ang-nail_.]

ANCESTOR, an'ses-tur, _n._ one from whom a person has descended: a
forefather:--_fem._ AN'CESTRESS.--_adj._ ANCES'TRAL.--_ns._
AN'CESTOR-WOR'SHIP, the chief element in the religion of China and other
countries--erroneously supposed by Herbert Spencer to be the foundation of
all religion; AN'CESTRY, a line of ancestors: lineage. [O. Fr.
_ancestre_--L. _antecessor_--_ante_, before, _ced[)e]re_, _cessum_, to go.]

[Illustration]

ANCHOR, ang'kor, _n._ an implement for retaining a ship in a particular
spot by temporarily chaining it to the bed of a sea or river. The most
common form has two flukes, one or other of which enters the ground, and so
gives hold; but many modifications are used, some with movable arms, some
self-canting.--Anchors are distinguished as the _starboard_ and _port
bowers_, _sheet_, _spare_, _stream_, _kedge_, and _grapnel_, or _boat
anchors_: (_fig._) anything that gives stability or security.--_v.t._ to
fix by an anchor: to fasten.--_v.i._ to cast anchor: to stop, or rest
on.--_ns._ ANCH'ORAGE, the act of anchoring: the place where a ship anchors
or can anchor: (_Shak._) the anchor and all the necessary tackle for
anchoring: a position affording support: (_fig._) anything that gives a
resting-place or support to the mind: duty imposed on ships for anchoring;
ANCH'OR-HOLD, the hold of an anchor upon the ground: (_fig._)
security.--_adj._ ANCH'ORLESS, without such: unstable.--_n._
MUSHROOM-ANCHOR, an anchor with a saucer-shaped head on a central shank,
used for mooring.--AT ANCHOR, anchored.--TO CAST ANCHOR, to let down the
anchor, to take up a position; TO WEIGH ANCHOR, to take up the anchor so as
to be able to sail away. [A.S. _ancor_--L. _ancora_--Gr. _angkyra_,
_angkos_, a bend. Conn. with ANGLE.]

ANCHORET, ang'kor-et, ANCHORITE, ang'kor-[=i]t, _n._ one who has withdrawn
from the world, especially for religious reasons: a hermit.--The form
ANACH'ORET occurs in many books on church history for the recluses of the
East in the early history of the church.--_ns._ ANCH'OR (_Shak._), an
anchorite--earlier still also an anchoress, as in the book-title _Ancren
Riwle_, the 'Rule of Nuns;' ANCH'ORAGE, the retreat of a hermit;
ANCH'ORESS, a female anchorite: a nun--also ANC'RESS, ANK'RESS,
ANCH'ORITESS.--_adjs._ ANCH'ORETIC, -AL. [Gr.
_anach[=o]r[=e]t[=e]s_--_ana_, apart, _ch[=o]rein_, to go.]

ANCHOVY, an-ch[=o]'vi, _n._ a small fish of the herring family, much fished
in the Mediterranean for pickling, and for a sauce made from it,
anchovy-paste, &c.--_n._ ANCH[=O]'VY-PEAR, the fruit of a myrtaceous
Jamaica tree, pickled and eaten like the East Indian mango, which it much
resembles in taste. [Sp. and Port. _anchova_; Fr. _anchois_. Of doubtful
etymology. The Basque _anchoa_, _anchua_, has been connected with _antzua_,
dry.]

ANCHYLOSIS, ANKYLOSIS, ang-k[=i]-l[=o]'sis, _n._ the coalescence of two
bones, or the union of the different parts of a bone: stiffness in a joint
through destruction of the articular cartilages, or a thickening and
shortening of the natural fibrous tissues around the joint. [Gr.;
_angkylos_, crooked.]

ANCIENT, [=a]n'shent, _adj._ old: belonging to former times, specifically,
of times prior to the downfall of the western Roman empire (476 A.D.): of
great age or duration: of past times in a general sense: venerable:
antique, old-fashioned.--_n._ an aged man, a patriarch: a superior in age
or dignity.--_adv._ AN'CIENTLY.--_ns._ AN'CIENTNESS; AN'CIENTRY,
ancientness, seniority: ancestry: dignity of birth: (_Shak._) old
people.--_n.pl._ AN'CIENTS, those who lived in remote times, esp. the
Greeks and Romans of classical times: (_B._) elders.--THE ANCIENT OF DAYS,
a title in the Holy Scriptures for the Almighty, applied by Byron to
Athens. [Fr. _ancien_--Low L. _antianus_, old--L. _ante_, before. See
ANTIQUE.]

ANCIENT, [=a]n'shent, _n._ (_obs._) a flag or its bearer: an ensign. [Corr.
of Fr. _enseigne_. See ENSIGN.]

ANCILLARY, an'sil-ar-i, _adj._ subservient, subordinate (with _to_). [L.
_ancilla_, a maid-servant.]

ANCIPITAL, an-sip'i-tal, _adj._ two-headed: double: doubtful: (_bot._)
two-edged and flattened.--Also ANCIP'ITOUS. [L. _anceps_, _ancipit-is_,
double--_an_ for _amb_, on both sides, and _caput_, the head.]

ANCOME, ang'kum, _n._ (_prov._--Scot. _income_) a small inflammatory
swelling, coming on suddenly. [Same as INCOME.]

AND, and, _conj._ signifies addition, or repetition, and is used to connect
words and sentences, to introduce a consequence, &c.--in M. E. (but not
A.S.) it was used for _if_, and often also with added _if_, as in Luke xii.
45. _An_ became common for _and_ in this sense, as often in
Shakespeare.--It sometimes expresses emphatically a difference in quality
between things of the same class, as 'there are friends ... _and_ friends.'
[A.S., and in the other Teut. lang.; prob. allied to L. _ante_, Gr. _anti_,
over against.]

ANDANTE, an-dan'te, _adj._ and _n._ (_mus._) moving with moderate and even
expression: a movement or piece composed in andante time.--_adj._
ANDANTI'NO, of a movement somewhat slower than andante, but sometimes
meaning 'with less of andante' = somewhat quicker.--ANDANTE AFFETTUOSO,
slow but pathetically; ANDANTE CANTABILE, slow, but in a singing style;
ANDANTE CON MOTO, slow, but with emotion; ANDANTE GRAZIOSO, slow, but
gracefully; ANDANTE MAESTOSO, slow, with majesty; ANDANTE NON TROPPO, slow,
but not too much so. [It.--pr.p. of _andare_, to go.]

ANDEAN, an-d[=e]'an, _adj._ of or like the Andes Mountains.

[Illustration]

ANDIRON, and'[=i]-urn, _n._ the iron bars which support the ends of the
logs in a wood fire, or in which a spit turns. [O. Fr. _andier_ (Mod. Fr.
_landier_--_l'andier_); Low. L. _anderius_, _andena_; further ety. dubious,
perhaps ultimately cog. with END. The termination was early confused with
_iron_, hence the spellings _and-iron_, _hand-iron_.]

ANDROCEPHALOUS, an-dro-sef'a-lus, _adj._ having a human head, as a sphinx
or Assyrian bull. [Gr. _an[=e]r_, _andros_, a man, _kephal[=e]_, a head.]

ANDROGYNOUS, an-droj'i-nus, _adj._ having the characteristics of both male
and female in one individual: hermaphrodite: (_bot._) having an
inflorescence of both male and female flowers--also ANDROG'YNAL
(_rare_).--_n._ ANDROG'YNY, hermaphroditism. [Gr.; _an[=e]r_, _andros_, a
man, and _gyn[=e]_, woman.]

ANDROID, an'droid, _n._ an automaton resembling a human being.--Also
ANDR[=O]'IDES.

ANDROMEDA, an-drom'e-da, _n._ a genus of shrubs of the heath family: the
name of a northern constellation. [_Andromeda_, in Greek mythology, a
maiden bound to a rock, and exposed to a sea-monster, but delivered by
Perseus.]

ANE, [=a]n, or yin, Scotch form of ONE.

ANEAL, ANELE, an-[=e]l', _v.t._ to anoint with oil: to administer extreme
unction. [M. E. _anele_, from an A.S. verb compounded of A.S. _on_, on, and
_ele_, oil.]

ANEAR, a-n[=e]r', _adv._ nearly: near.--_prep._ near.--_v.t._ to approach,
to come near to.

ANECDOTE, an'ek-d[=o]t, _n._ an incident of private life: a short
story.--_n._ AN'ECDOTAGE, anecdotes collectively: garrulous old
age.--_adjs._ AN'ECDOTAL, ANECDOT'ICAL, in the form of an anecdote. [Gr.;
'not published'--_a_, _an_, neg., and _ekdotos_, published--_ek_, out, and
_didonai_, to give.]

ANELACE. See ANLACE.

ANELECTROTONUS, an'el-ek-trot'on-us, _n._ (_phys._) the diminished
excitability of a nerve near the anode of an electric current passing
through it.--_adj._ AN'ELEC'TRIC, parting readily with its
electricity.--_n._ a body which readily gives up its electricity.--_n._
ANELEC'TRODE, the positive pole of a galvanic battery.--_adj._
AN'ELECTROT'ONIC. [Gr. _an_, up, _elektron_, amber.]

ANEMOGRAPH, a-nem'[=o]-graf, _n._ an instrument for measuring and recording
the direction and velocity of the wind. [Gr. _anemos_, wind, _graphein_, to
write.]

ANEMOMETER, a-ne-mom'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
velocity or pressure of the wind.--_adj._ ANEMOMET'RIC.--_n._ ANEMOM'ETRY,
the measurement of the force or velocity of the wind. [Gr. _anemos_, wind,
and METER.]

ANEMONE, a-nem'o-ne, _n._ a plant of the crowfoot family.--_n._
SEA'-ANEM'ONE, a popular name of Actinia and some allied genera of
Actinoza. [Gr. _anem[=o]ne_, said to be from _anemos_, wind, because some
of the species love exposed and wind-swept situations.]

AN-END, an-end', _prep. phrase_, to the end, continuously: upright.--MOST
AN-END, almost always.

ANENT, a-nent', _prep._ and _adv._ in a line with: against: towards: in
regard to, concerning, about. [Mainly prov. Eng. and Scot., M.E.
_anent_--A.S. _on-_ _efen_, 'on even with' (dat.).]

ANEROID, an'e-roid, _adj._ denoting a barometer by which the pressure of
the air is measured without the use of quicksilver or other fluid.--_n._ a
contr. of 'aneroid barometer.' [Fr.--Gr. _a_, neg., _n[=e]ros_, wet.]

ANEURISM, an'[=u]r-izm, _n._ a soft tumour arising from the dilatation of
an artery acting on a part weakened by disease or injury: (_fig._) any
abnormal enlargement--_adjs._ AN'EURISMAL, AN'EURISMATIC. [Gr.
_aneurysma_--_ana_, up, _eurys_, wide.]

ANEW, a-n[=u]', _adv._ afresh: again. [OF and NEW.]

ANFRACTUOUS, an-fract-[=u]'us, _adj._ winding, involved, circuitous.--_n._
ANFRACTUOS'ITY. [L. _anfractuösus_, _anfract-us_.]

ANGEL, [=a]n'jel, _n._ a divine messenger: a ministering spirit: an
attendant or guardian spirit: a person possessing the qualities attributed
to such--gentleness, purity, &c.: one supposed to have a special
commission, as the head of the Church in Rev. ii. and iii., or the _angel_
of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, who corresponds in a limited sense to
the bishop of other Christian denominations: (_poet._) a messenger
generally: in art, the conventional figure attributed to the angel--a
figure of great beauty, youthful, clothed in flowing garments, with wings:
an old Eng. coin = 10s., bearing the figure of an angel.--_n._ AN'GEL-FISH,
a voracious fish, allied to the shark, from six to eight feet long, with
large, wing-like pectoral fins.--_adjs._ ANGEL'IC (an-),
ANGEL'ICAL.--_adv._ ANGEL'ICALLY.--_ns._ ANGELOL'ATRY ([=a]n-),
angel-worship; ANGELOL'OGY, the doctrine regarding angels; ANGELOPH'ANY,
the manifestation of an angel to man. [Gr. _angelos_, a messenger.]

ANGELICA, an-jel'i-ka, _n._ a genus of umbelliferous plants, the roots and
seeds of some species of which are used in making gin, bitters, &c.--the
tender stalks and midribs of the leaves are candied and used as a
confection: confections.--_n._ AN'GEL-WAT'ER, a perfumed liquid, at first
made largely from angelica, then from ambergris, rose-water, orange-flower
water, &c. [From their supposed magical properties.]

ANGELUS, an'je-lus, _n._ the 'Hail, Mary,' or prayer to the Virgin,
containing the angelic salutation: the bell rung in Roman Catholic
countries at morning, noon, and sunset, to invite the faithful to recite
the Angelic Salutation. [From its first words, _'Angelus_ domini nuntiavit
Mariæ.']

ANGER, ang'ger, _n._ a strong emotion excited by a real or fancied injury,
and involving a desire for retaliation.--_v.t._ to make angry: to
irritate.--_adj._ AN'GERLESS.--_advs._ AN'GERLY, a 17th-cent. form (still
used in an archaic sense) for ANGRILY; ANG'RILY.--_n._ ANG'RINESS.--_adj._
ANG'RY, excited with anger: inflamed: lowering. [Ice. _angr_; allied to
ANGUISH.]

ANGEVIN, an'je-vin, _adj._ pertaining to Anjou: relating to the Plantagenet
house that reigned in England from 1154 to 1485, its first king, Henry II.,
being son of Geoffrey V., Count of Anjou, and Matilda, daughter of Henry I.
of England. By some the term Angevin is only allowed until the loss of
Anjou under John (1204); by others, till the deposition of Richard II. in
1399.

ANGINA, an-j[=i]'na, _n._ any inflammatory affection of the throat, as
quinsy, croup, &c.: usually in medical phraseology with adjective, as
_Angina rheumatica_ = rheumatic sore throat.--ANGINA PECTORIS, a disease of
the heart marked by paroxysms of intense pain, beginning at the breastbone
and radiating thence mainly towards the left shoulder and arm. [L.
_ang[)i]na_. See ANGUISH.]

ANGIOCARPOUS, an-ji-[=o]-kar'pus, _adj._ having the fruit in an envelope
distinct from the calyx. [Gr. _angeion_, a case, _karpos_, fruit.]

ANGIOSPERM, an'ji-o-sperm, _n._ a plant whose ovules or future seeds are
enclosed in a closed ovary, and fertilised through the medium of a stigma,
while in _Gymnosperms_ the ovule is naked, and the pollen is applied
directly to its surface.--_adjs._ ANGIOSPERM'OUS, ANGIOSPERM'AL,
ANGIOSPER'MATOUS.

[Illustration]

ANGLE, ang'gl, _n._ a corner: the point where two lines meet: (_geom._) the
inclination of two straight lines which meet, but are not in the same
straight line: any outlying corner or nook.--_adj._ ANG'ULAR, having an
angle or corner: (_fig._) stiff in manner: the opposite of easy or
graceful: bony and lean in figure.--_n._ ANGULAR'ITY.--_adj._ ANG'ULATED,
formed with angles. [Fr.--L. _angulus_; cog. with Gr. _angkylos_; both from
root _ank_, to bend, seen also in ANCHOR, ANKLE.]

ANGLE, ang'gl, _n._ a hook or bend: a fishing-rod with line and
hook.--_v.i._ to fish with an angle.--_v.t._ to entice: to try to gain by
some artifice.--_ns._ ANG'LER, one who fishes with an angle: a voracious
fish about three feet long, not uncommon on British shores, and called also
the _Fishing-frog_, the _Sea-devil_, and by the Scotch, _Wide-gab_;
ANG'LING, the art or practice of fishing with a rod and line. [A.S.
_angel_, a hook, allied to ANCHOR.]

ANGLES, ang'glz, _n.pl._ the Low German stock that settled in Northumbria,
Mercia, and East Anglia.

ANGLICAN, ang'glik-an, _adj._ English: belonging to, or characteristic of,
the Church of England.--_n._ ANG'LICANISM, attachment to English
institutions, esp. the English Church: the principles of the English
Church.--_v.t._ ANG'LICISE, to express in English idiom.--_n._ ANG'LICISM,
an English idiom or peculiarity of language.--_v.t._ ANG'LIFY, to make
English.

ANGLO-, ang'glo, _pfx._ English--used in composition, as _Anglo_-Saxon,
&c.--_ns._ ANG'LO-CATH'OLIC, one who calls himself a Catholic of the
Anglican pattern, refusing the name of 'Protestant;' used adjectively, as
in 'Anglo-Catholic Library;' ANG'LO-CATHO'LICISM.--_adj._ and _n._
ANG'LO-SAX'ON, applied to the earliest form of the English language--the
term Old English is now preferred. Properly it should have referred only to
the Saxons of Wessex, Essex, Middlesex, and Sussex, as distinct from the
Angles.--_ns._ ANG'LO-SAX'ONDOM; ANGLO-SAX'ONISM.--ANGLO-ISRAELITE THEORY,
an opinion held by not a few well-meaning persons, innocent of scientific
ethnology, that the English are descended from the Israelites who were
carried into captivity by the Assyrians under Sargon in 721 B.C.

ANGLOMANIA, ang'glo-m[=a]n'i-a, _n._ a mania for what is English: an
indiscriminate admiration of English institutions.--_ns._ ANG'LOMAN
(_rare_), ANG'LOM[=A]N'IAC.

ANGLOPHOBIA, ang-gl[=o]-f[=o]'bi-a, _n._ fear and dislike of
England.--_ns._ AN'GLOPHOBE, ANGLOPH[=O]'BIST.--_adj._ ANGLOPH[=O]'BIC.
[Fr. _Anglophobe_--L. _Anglo-_, English, Gr. _phobein_, to fear.]

ANGORA, ang-g[=o]'ra, _n._ cloth made from the wool of the Angora
goat.--ANGORA WOOL, the long white silky hair of the Angora goat, highly
valued in manufactures. [_Angora_, a city of Asia Minor, famous for its
breed of goats.]

ANGOSTURA, ang-gos-t[=oo]'ra, _n._ a town of Venezuela, on the Orinoco
(renamed Ciudad Bolivar in 1819), giving its name to an aromatic bitter
bark, valuable as a febrifuge and tonic.--ANGOSTURA BITTERS is an essence
containing angostura, canella, cinchona, lemon peel, and other aromatics,
but much of what is sold under that name contains no angostura, but
consists mainly of cheretta or other simple tonic.

ANGRY. See ANGER.

ANGUINE, ang'gw[=i]n, _adj._ of or like a snake. [L. _anguis_, _anguin-is_,
a snake.]

ANGUISH, ang'gwish, _n._ excessive pain of body or mind: agony.--_n._
ANG'UISHMENT. [O. Fr. _angoisse_--L. _angustia_, a strait,
straitness--_ang-u-[)e]re_, to press tightly: to strangle. See ANGER.]

ANHARMONIC, an-har-mon'ik, _adj._ not harmonic: in geometry, a term applied
to the section of a line by four points, A, B, C, D, when their mutual
distances are such that AB divided by CB is unequal to AD divided by CD;
the ratio between these two quotients being called the _anharmonic_ ratio
of AC.

ANHELATION, an-he-l[=a]'shun, _n._ difficult respiration: shortness of
breath. [L. _anhelatio_--_anhel[=a]re_, from _an_, for _amb_, around, and
_hal-[=a]re_, to breathe.]

ANHUNGERED. See AHUNGERED.

ANHYDROUS, an-h[=i]'drus, _adj._ a term applied to a chemical substance
free from water.--_n.pl._ ANHY'DRIDES, a term now commonly given to the
compounds formerly known as anhydrous acids--in some cases the result of
the dehydration of acids, and in all cases representing in their
composition the acid _minus_ water.--_n._ ANHY'DRITE, a mineral consisting
of anhydrous sulphate of lime, with some slight addition of sea-salt,
appearing in several varieties--granular, fibrous, radiated and
translucent, compact and of various shades--white, blue, gray, red. [Gr.
_a_, _an_, neg., _hyd[=o]r_, water.]

ANIGHT, a-n[=i]t', _adv._ (_Shak._) of nights, at night. [OF and NIGHT.]

ANIL, an'il, _n._ a plant from whose leaves and stalks indigo is made. [Sp.
_anil_; Ar. _an-nil_ for _al-nil_, the indigo plant.]

ANILE, an'[=i]l, _adj._ old womanish: imbecile.--_n._ ANIL'ITY, imbecile
dotage. [L. _anus_, an old woman.]

ANILINE, an'il-in, _n._ a product of coal-tar extensively used in dyeing
and other industrial arts. [Port. _anil_, indigo, from which it was first
obtained.]

ANIMADVERT, an-im-ad-v[.e]rt', _v.i._ to criticise or censure.--_n._
ANIMADVER'SION, criticism, censure, or reproof. [L., to turn the mind
to--_animus_, the mind, _ad_, to, and _vert[)e]re_, to turn.]

ANIMAL, an'im-al, _n._ an organised being, having life, sensation, and
voluntary motion--it is distinguished from a plant, which is organised and
has life, but not sensation or voluntary motion: the name sometimes implies
the absence of the higher faculties peculiar to man.--_adj._ of or
belonging to animals: sensual.--_n._ ANIMALIS[=A]'TION, the act of
converting into animal substance, or of endowing with animal attributes:
brutalisation.--_v.t._ AN'IMALISE, to endow with animal life: to convert
into animal matter:--_pr.p._ an'imal[=i]sing; _pa.p._ an'imal[=i]sed.--_n._
AN'IMALISM, the state of being actuated by animal appetites only: the
exercise or enjoyment of animal life, as distinct from intellectual:
brutishness: sensuality: (_rare_) a mere animal being.--_adv._ AN'IMALLY,
physically merely.--ANIMAL SPIRITS, nervous force: exuberance of health and
life: cheerful buoyancy of temper: (_Milton_) the spirit or principle of
volition and sensation. [L.--_anima_, air, life, Gr. _anemos_,
wind--_a[=o]_, _a[=e]mi_, Sans. _an_, to breathe, to blow.]

ANIMALCULE, an-im-al'k[=u]l, _n._ a small animal, esp. one that cannot be
seen by the naked eye:--_pl._ ANIMAL'CULES, ANIMAL'CULA.--_adj._
ANIMAL'CULAR. [L. _animalculum_, dim. of ANIMAL.]

ANIMATE, an'im-[=a]t, _v.t._ to give life to: to enliven or inspirit: to
actuate.--_adj._ living: possessing animal life.--_adj._ AN'IMATED, lively:
full of spirit: endowed with life.--_adv._ ANIMAT'EDLY.--_p.adj._
AN'IMATING.--_adv._ ANIMAT'INGLY.--_ns._ ANIM[=A]'TION, liveliness: vigour;
AN'IMATOR, he who, or that which, animates. [See ANIMAL.]

ANIME, an'im, _n._ the resin of the West Indian locust-tree--used also for
other gums and resins. [Said to be Fr. _animé_, living, from the number of
insects in it; but perhaps a native name.]

ANIMISM, an'im-izm, _n._ a theory which regards the belief in separate
spiritual existences as the germ of religious ideas. It is adopted by E. B.
Tylor in his _Primitive Culture_ as the minimum definition of religion,
being considered to have arisen simply from the evidence of the senses,
interpreted by the crude and child-like science of the savage: the theory
of Stahl, which regarded the vital principle and the soul as
identical.--_n._ AN'IMIST.--_adj._ AN'IMISTIC. [L. _anima_, the soul.]

ANIMOSITY, an-im-os'i-ti, _n._ bitter hatred: enmity. [L. _animositas_,
fullness of spirit.]

ANIMUS, an'im-us, _n._ intention: actuating spirit: prejudice against. [L.
_animus_, spirit, soul, as distinguished from _anima_, the mere life.]

ANISE, an'is, _n._ an umbelliferous plant, the aromatic seeds of which are
used in making cordials. The anise of Matt. xxiii. 23 (Gr. _an[=e]thon_) is
properly the dill.--_ns._ AN'ISEED; ANISETTE', a cordial or liqueur
prepared from anise seed. [Gr. _anison_.]

ANKER, angk'[.e]r, _n._ a liquid measure used in Northern Europe, formerly
in England, varying considerably--that of Rotterdam having a capacity of 10
old wine gallons, or 8-1/3 imperial gallons. [Dut.]

ANKLE, ANCLE, angk'l, _n._ the joint connecting the foot and leg.--_adj._
ANK'LED, having, or pertaining to ankles.--_n._ ANK'LET, an ornament for
the ankle. [A.S. _ancléow_, cog. with Ger. _enkel_, and conn. with ANGLE.]

ANKYLOSIS. See ANCHYLOSIS.

ANLACE, ANELACE, an'l[=a]s, _n._ a short two-edged knife or dagger,
tapering to a point, formerly worn at the girdle. [Low L. _anelacius_;
perh. the old Welsh _anglas_.]

ANNA, an'a, _n._ an Indian coin worth nominally 1½d sterling, but always
the sixteenth part of a rupee. [Hind. _[=a]n[=a]_.]

ANNALS, an'alz, _n.pl._ records of events under the years in which they
happened: any historical work that follows the order of time in its
narrations, separating them off into single years, as the _Annals_ of
Tacitus: historical records generally: year-books.--_v.t._ ANN'ALISE, to
write annals: to record.--_n._ ANN'ALIST, a writer of annals. [L.
_annales_--_annus_, a year.]

ANNAT, an'at, ANNATE, an'[=a]t, _n._ the first-fruits, or one year's
income, or a specified portion of such, paid to the Pope by a bishop,
abbot, or other ecclesiastic, on his appointment to a new see or benefice.
It was abolished in England in 1534, and next year the right was annexed to
the crown, the fund thus arising being administered for the benefit of the
Church of England, afterwards transferred to the governors of Queen Anne's
Bounty, next to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners: (_Scots law_) the
half-year's stipend payable for the vacant half-year after the death of a
parish minister, to which his family or nearest of kin have right under an
act of 1672. [Low L. _annata_--L. _annus_, a year.]

ANNATTO. See ANATTA.

ANNEAL, an-[=e]l', _v.t._ to temper glass or metals by subjecting them to
great heat and gradual cooling: to heat in order to fix colours on, as
glass.--_n._ ANNEAL'ING. [Pfx. _an-_, and A.S. _ælan_, to burn.]

ANNELIDA, an-el'i-da, _n._ a class of animals comprising the red-blooded
worms, having a long body composed of numerous rings.--_n._ ANN'ELID. [L.
_annellus_, dim. of _annulus_, a ring.]

ANNEX, an-neks', _v.t._ to add to the end: to join or attach: to take
permanent possession of additional territory: to affix: append (with
_to_).--_n._ something added: a supplementary building--often with the Fr.
spelling _annexe_.--_n._ ANNEX[=A]'TION, act of annexing.--_n._ and _adj._
ANNEX[=A]'TIONIST.--_ns._ ANNEX'ION, ANNEX'MENT (_Shak._), addition: the
thing annexed. [Fr. _annexer_--L. _annex-um_, _annect[)e]re_: _ad_, to,
_nect-[)e]re_, to tie.]

ANNIHILATE, an-n[=i]'hil-[=a]t, _v.t._ to reduce to nothing: to put out of
existence: to render null and void, to abrogate.--_ns._ ANNIHIL[=A]'TION,
state of being reduced to nothing: act of destroying: (_theol._) the
destruction of soul as well as body; ANNIHIL[=A]'TIONISM, the belief that
the soul dies with the body.--_adj._ ANNIHIL[=A]'TIVE.--_n._
ANNIHIL[=A]'TOR, one who annihilates. [L. _annihilatus_, _annihil[=a]re_;
_ad_, to, _nihil_, nothing.]

ANNIVERSARY, an-ni-v[.e]rs'ar-i, _adj._ returning or happening every year:
annual.--_n._ the day of the year on which an event happened or is
celebrated: the celebration proper to such, esp. a mass or religious
service. [L. _anniversarius_; _annus_, a year, and _vert[)e]re_, _versum_,
to turn.]

ANNOTATE, an'not-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make notes upon.--_ns._ AN'NOTATION, a
note of explanation: comment; AN'NOTATOR, a writer of notes, a commentator.
[L. _annot[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _not[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to mark.]

ANNOUNCE, an-nowns', _v.t._ to declare: to give public notice of: to make
known.--_n._ ANNOUNCE'MENT. [O. Fr. _anoncer_--L. _annunti[=a]re_--_ad_,
to, _nunti_, _-[=a]re_, to deliver news.]

ANNOY, an-noi', _v.t._ to trouble: to vex: to tease: to harm, esp. in
military sense:--_pr.p._ annoy'ing; _pa.p._ annoyed'.--_ns._ ANNOY (now
poetic only), ANNOY'ANCE, that which annoys.--_adv._ ANNOY'INGLY. [O. Fr.
_anoier_ (It. _annoiare_); noun, _anoi_ (mod. _ennui_), acc. to Diez from
L. phrase, _in odio_, as in 'est mihi _in odio_' = 'it is to me hateful.']

ANNUAL, an'n[=u]-al, _adj._ yearly: coming every year: requiring to be
renewed every year: performed in a year.--_n._ a plant that lives out one
year: a book published yearly, esp. applied to the sumptuous books, usually
illustrated with good engravings, much in demand in the first half of the
19th century for Christmas, New Year, and birthday presents.--_adv._
AN'NUALLY. [Through Fr. from L. _annualis_--_annus_, a year.]

ANNUITY, an-n[=u]'i-ti, _n._ a payment generally (but not necessarily) of
uniform amount falling due in each year during a given term, such as a
period of years or the life of an individual, the capital sum not being
returnable.--_n._ ANN[=U]'ITANT, one who receives an annuity.--CERTAIN
ANNUITY, one for a fixed term of years, subject to no contingency whatever;
CONTINGENT ANNUITY, one that depends also on the continuance of some
status, as the life of a person whose duration is calculated by the theory
of probabilities. An annuity is usually held payable to the end of each
year survived; but when, in addition, a proportion of the year's annuity is
payable up to the day of death, the annuity is said to be COMPLETE--the
ordinary annuity being sometimes, for distinction, referred to as a CURTATE
ANNUITY. When the first payment is due in advance, the annuity is known as
an ANNUITY DUE; when the first payment is not to be made until the expiry
of a certain number of years, it is called a DEFERRED or REVERSIONARY
ANNUITY.

ANNUL, an-nul', _v.t._ to make null, to reduce to nothing: to
abolish:--_pr.p._ annul'ling; _pa.p._ annulled'.--_n._ ANNUL'MENT, the act
of annulling. [Fr. _annuler_--Low L. _annull[=a]-re_, to make into
nothing--L. _ad-_, to, _nullus_, none.]

ANNULAR, an'n[=u]l-ar, _adj._ ring-shaped.--_adjs._ AN'NULATE, AN'NULATED,
formed or divided into rings.--_ns._ ANNUL[=A]'TION, a ring or belt: a
circular formation; AN'NULET, a little ring: (_archit._) a small flat
fillet, encircling a column, &c., used either by itself or in connection
with other mouldings: (_her._) a little circle borne as a charge on coats
of arms.--_adj._ AN'NULOSE, having rings: composed of rings. [L.
_annularis_; _annulus_ or _anulus_, a ring--dim. of _anus_, a rounding or
ring.]

ANNUNCIATION, an-nun-si-[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of announcing.--_v.t._
ANNUN'CIATE, to proclaim.--_n._ ANNUNCI[=A]'TION-DAY, the anniversary of
the Angel's salutation to the Virgin Mary, the 25th of March, Lady-day.
[See ANNOUNCE.]

ANODE, an'[=o]d, _n._ a term in electrolysis introduced by Faraday to
designate the positive pole, or that surface by which the galvanic current
enters the body undergoing decomposition (_electrolyte_)--as opp. to
_Cathode_, the negative pole. [Gr. _ana_, up, _hodos_, way.]

ANODYNE, an'o-d[=i]n, _n._ a medicine that allays pain, whether acting on
the nerves and nerve terminations (aconite, belladonna, cocaine), on the
brain (chloral, Indian hemp), or on all these parts (opium, bromide of
potassium). [Gr.; _a_, _an_, neg., and _odyn[=e]_, pain.]

ANOINT, an-oint', _v.t._ to smear with ointment or oil: to consecrate with
oil.--_n._ ANOINT'MENT, the act of anointing or state of being
anointed.--THE ANOINTED, the Messiah. [= _an_+_oint_. See OINTMENT.]

ANOMALY, an-om'al-i, _n._ irregularity: deviation from rule: (_astron._)
the angle measured at the sun between a planet in any point of its orbit
and the last perihelion.--_adjs._ ANOMALIST'IC, -AL, anomalous: departing
from established rules: irregular.--_n._ ANOM'ALITE, an irregular
mineral.--_adj._ ANOM'ALOUS, irregular: deviating from rule.--ANOMALISTIC
YEAR, the interval that elapses between two successive passages of the
earth through its perihelion, or point of nearest approach to the sun = 365
days 6 hr. 13 min. 49 sec., being 4 min. 39 sec. longer than the sidereal
year. [Gr. _an[=o]malos_--_a_, _an_, neg., and _homalos_, even--_homos_,
same.]

ANON, an-on', _adv._ in one (instant): immediately.

ANONYMOUS, an-on'im-us, _adj._ wanting a name: not having the name of the
author, as distinguished from _pseudonymous_, when another than his real
name has been given.--_ns._ AN'ONYM, a person whose name is not given: a
pseudonym; ANONYM'ITY, the quality or state of being anonymous.--_adv._
ANON'YMOUSLY. [Gr. _an[=o]nymos_--_a_, _an_, neg., and _onoma_, name.]

ANOTHER, an-u_th_'[.e]r, _adj._ not the same: a different or distinct
(thing or person): one more: a second: one more of the same kind: any
other.--ONE ANOTHER, now used as a compound reciprocal pronoun (of two or
more); ONE WITH ANOTHER, taken all together, taken on the average.--YOU'RE
ANOTHER, the vulgar _Tu quoque_. [Orig. _an other_.]

ANSERINE, an's[.e]r-[=i]n, or -in, _adj._ relating to the goose or
goose-tribe: stupid, silly. [L. _anserinus_, _anser_.]

ANSWER, an's[.e]r, _v.t._ to reply to: to satisfy or solve: to repay: to
suit: to suffer the consequences of.--_v.i._ to reply: to reply favourably:
to act in conformity with, as 'to answer the helm:' to be accountable for
(with _for_): to correspond: to be advantageous to: to turn out well.--_n._
a reply: a solution.--_adj._ AN'SWERABLE, able to be answered: accountable:
suitable: equivalent: proportional (with _to_).--_adv._ AN'SWERABLY.--_n._
AN'SWERER.--_adv._ AN'SWERLESS. [A.S. _andswar-ian_--_andswaru_; _and-_,
against, _swerian_, to swear.]

ANT, ant, _n._ a small insect: the emmet or pismire.--_ns._ ANT'-BEAR, one
of the largest species of the ant-eaters, found in the swampy regions in
Central and Southern America, also called the _Great Ant-eater_; ANT'-COW
(see APHIDES); ANT'-EAT'ER, a genus of edentate South American quadrupeds,
feeding on insects, and chiefly on ants, which they procure by means of
their very long cylindrical tongue covered with a viscid saliva; ANT'-HILL,
the hillock raised by ants to form their nest: also figuratively applied,
as to the earth; ANT'-THRUSH, a general name applied to birds of tropical
and sub-tropical countries which feed to a large extent on ants. [A contr.
of EMMET--A.S. _æmete_.]

AN'T, a contr. of _aren't_, _are not_; colloquial for _am not_, _is not_,
_has not_.--AN'T = _on't_, _on it_ (_Shak._).

ANTACID, ant-as'id, _n._ a medicine which counteracts acidity.--_adj._
possessing such quality. [Gr. _anti_, against, and ACID.]

ANTAGONISM, ant-ag'on-izm, _n._ a contending or struggling against:
opposition (with _to_, and also _with_).--_n._ ANTAGONIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._
ANTAG'ONISE, to struggle violently against: to counteract the action of an
opposite muscle.--_p.adj._ ANTAG'ONISED, made antagonistic, opposed beyond
hope of reconciliation.--_n._ ANTAG'ONIST, one who contends or struggles
with another: an opponent.--_adjs._ ANTAG'ONIST, ANTAGONIST'IC, contending
against: opposed to.--_adv._ ANTAGONIS'TICALLY. [Gr. _anti_,
against--_ag[=o]n_, contest. See AGONY.]

ANTALKALI, ant-al'ka-li, _n._ anything that counteracts the action of an
alkali. [_Ant-_ and ALKALI.]

ANTARCTIC, ant-ärkt'ik, _adj._ opposite the Arctic: relating to the south
pole or to south polar regions.--_adj._ ANTARCT'ICAL.--_adv._
ANTARCT'ICALLY (_obs._). [Gr. _anti_, opposite, and ARCTIC.]

ANTARTHRITIC, ant-ar-thrit'ik, _adj._ counteracting gout. [Gr. _anti_,
against, and ARTHRITIC.]

ANTASTHMATIC, ant-ast-mat'ik, _adj._ counteracting asthma. [Gr. _anti_,
against, and ASTHMATIC.]

ANTECEDENT, an-te-s[=e]d'ent, _adj._ going before in time: prior.--_n._
that which precedes in time: (_gram._) the noun or pronoun to which a
relative pronoun refers: (_logic_) a statement or proposition from which
another is logically deduced: (_math._) the antecedent of a ratio is the
first of two terms which compose the ratio--the first and third in a series
of four proportionals: (_pl._) previous principles, conduct, history,
&c.--_n._ ANTECED'ENCE.--_adv._ ANTECED'ENTLY. [L. _antecedent-em_; _ante_,
before, _ced[)e]re_, _cessum_, to go.]

ANTECESSOR, an-te-ses'sor, _n._ (_rare_) a predecessor.

ANTECHAMBER, an'te-ch[=a]m-b[.e]r, _n._ a chamber or room leading to the
chief apartment. [Fr. _anti-chambre_, _ante-chambre_.]

ANTECHAPEL, an'te-cha-pl, _n._ the outer part of the west end of a college
chapel. [L. _ante_, before, and CHAPEL.]

ANTEDATE, an'te-d[=a]t, _n._ a date assigned which is earlier than the
actual date.--_v.t._ to date before the true time: to assign an event to an
earlier date: to bring about at an earlier date: to be of previous date: to
accelerate: to anticipate. [L. _ante_, before, and DATE.]

ANTEDILUVIAN, -AL, an-te-di-l[=u]'vi-an, -al, _adj._ existing or happening
before the Deluge or Flood: resembling the state of things before the
Flood: very old-fashioned, primitive.--_adv._ ANTEDIL[=U]'VIALLY.--_n._
ANTEDIL[=U]'VIAN, one who lived before the Flood: one who lives to be very
old. [See DELUGE.]

ANTEFIX, an'te-fiks, _n._ (usually in _pl._) term in ancient architecture,
used of the ornamental tiles placed on the eaves of buildings to conceal
the ends of the common or roofing tiles:--_pl._ AN'TEFIXES,
AN'TEFIXA.--_adj._ AN'TEFIXAL. [L. _ante_, before, in front, and _fixum_,
_fig[)e]re_, to fix.]

ANTELOPE, an'te-l[=o]p, _n._ a quadruped belonging to the hollow-horned
section of the order of Ruminants, differing from the goat in its beardless
chin--a gregarious, peaceable animal, remarkable for grace, agility, and
swiftness. [O. Fr. _antelop_--L. _antalopus_--Gr. _antholops_, of which the
origin is uncertain, perhaps from Gr. _anthein_, to blossom, shine, and
_[=o]ps_, eye, and thus equivalent to 'bright-eyes.']

ANTELUCAN, an-te-l[=oo]'kan, _adj._ before dawn or daylight. [L.
_antelucanus_--_ante_, before, _lux_, _luc-is_, light.]

ANTEMERIDIAN, an-te-me-ri'di-an, _adj._ before midday or noon. [See
MERIDIAN.]

ANTEMUNDANE, an-te-mun'd[=a]n, _adj._ before the existence or creation of
the world. [L. _ante_, before, and MUNDANE.]

ANTENATAL, an-te-n[=a]'tal, _adj._ existing before birth.--_n._
AN'TE-NA'TI, those born before a certain time, as opposed to _Post'-na'ti_,
those born after it--of Scotsmen born before 1603, and Americans before the
Declaration of Independence (1776). [L. _ante_, before, and NATAL.]

ANTE-NICENE, an'te-n[=i]'s[=e]n, _adj._ before the first general council of
the Christian Church held at Nice or Nicæa in Bithynia, 325 A.D.

ANTENNÆ, an-ten'[=e], _n.pl._ the feelers or horns of insects, crustaceans,
and myriopods.--_adjs._ ANTENN'AL, ANTENN'ARY, ANTENN'IFORM,
ANTENNIF'EROUS. [L. _antenna_, a sailyard, the L. translation of
Aristotle's _keraiai_, horns of insects, a word also used of the projecting
ends of sailyards.]

ANTENUPTIAL, an-te-nupsh'al, _adj._ before nuptials or marriage. [L.
_ante_, before, and NUPTIAL.]

ANTEORBITAL, an-te-or'bit-al, _adj._ situated in front of the eyes. [L.
_ante_, before, and ORBIT, eye-socket.]

ANTEPASCHAL, an-te-pas'kal, _adj._ relating to the time before Easter. [L.
_ante_, before, and PASCHAL.]

ANTEPAST, an'te-past, _n._ (_obs._) something to whet the appetite: a
foretaste. [L. _ante_, before, and _pastum_, _pasc[)e]re_, to feed.]

ANTEPENDIUM, an-te-pend'i-um, _n._ a frontlet, forecloth, frontal, or
covering for an altar, of silk, satin, or velvet, often richly embroidered.
[L. _ante_, before, and _pend-[)e]re_, to hang.]

ANTEPENULT, an-te-pen'ult, _n._ the syllable before the penult or next
ultimate syllable of a word: the last syllable of a word but two.--_adj._
ANTEPENULT'IMATE. [L. _ante_, before, and PENULT.]

ANTEPRANDIAL, an-te-prand'i-al, _adj._ before dinner. [L. _ante_, before,
and _prandium_, dinner.]

ANTERIOR, an-t[=e]'ri-or, _adj._ before, in time or place: in front.--_ns._
ANTERIOR'ITY, ANT[=E]'RIORNESS.--_adv._ ANT[=E]'RIORLY. [L.; comp. of
_ante_, before.]

ANTEROOM, an'te-r[=oo]m, _n._ a room before another: a room leading into a
principal apartment. [L. _ante_, before, and ROOM.]

ANTEVENIENT, an-te-v[=e]'ni-ent, _adj._ coming before, preceding. [L.
_antevenient-em_; _ante_, before, _ven-[=i]re_, to come.]

ANTHELION, ant-h[=e]l'yun, _n._ a luminous coloured ring observed by a
spectator on a cloud or fog-bank over against the sun:--_pl._ ANTHEL'IA.
[Gr. _anti_, opposite, _h[=e]lios_, the sun.]

ANTHELMINTIC, an-thel-mint'ik, _adj._ destroying or expelling worms. [Gr.
_anti_, against, and _helmins_, _helminthos_, a worm.]

ANTHEM, an'them, _n._ a piece of sacred music sung in alternate parts: a
piece of sacred music set to a passage from Scripture: any song of praise
or gladness.--_v.t._ to praise in an anthem.--_adv._ AN'THEMWISE. [A.S.
_antefn_--Gr. _antiph[=on]a_--_anti_, in return, _ph[=o]ne_, the voice. See
ANTIPHON.]

[Illustration]

ANTHER, an'th[.e]r, _n._ the top of the stamen in a flower which contains
the pollen or fertilising dust.--_adjs._ AN'THERAL; ANTHERIF'EROUS, bearing
anthers; ANTH'EROID, resembling an anther. [L. _anthera_, which meant a
medicine extracted from flowers, and consisting esp. of the internal organs
of flowers--Gr. _anth[=e]ros_, flowery--_anthos_, a flower.]

ANTHERIDIUM, an-ther-id'i-um, _n._ the male reproductive organs of many
cryptogams, as ferns, horse-tails, mosses, &c. [L. _anthera_, and _-idium_,
Gr. dim. ending.]

ANTHEROZOOID, an-ther-o-z[=o]'oid, _n._ a minute moving body in the
antheridia of cryptogams. [L. _anthera_, and _zooid_--Gr. _z[=oo]eid[=e]s_,
like an animal--_z[=o]on_, animal, and _eidos_, shape.]

ANTHOCARPOUS, an-tho-kär'pus, _adj._ (_bot._) bearing fruit resulting from
many flowers, as the pine-apple. [From Gr. _anthos_, a flower, _karpos_,
fruit.]

ANTHOID, an'thoid, _adj._ flower-like. [Gr. _anthos_, a flower, and
_-eid[=e]s_, like.]

ANTHOLITE, an'tho-l[=i]t, _n._ a flower turned into stone, a fossil flower.
[Gr. _anthos_, a flower, _lithos_, stone.]

ANTHOLOGY, an-thol'oj-i, _n._ (_lit._) a gathering or collection of
flowers: a collection of poems or choice literary extracts, esp. epigrams,
orig. applied to the collections of Greek epigrams so called.--_adj._
ANTHOLOG'ICAL. [Gr. _anthos_, a flower, _legein_, to gather.]

ANTHOMANIA, an-th[=o]-m[=a]n'ya, _n._ a madness for flowers.----_n._
ANTHOM[=A]N'IAC. [Gr. _anthos_, and _mania_, madness.]

ANTHONY (ST), an'ton-i, the patron saint of swineherds: the smallest pig in
a litter.--ANTHONY'S FIRE, a popular name for erysipelas.

ANTHOZOA, an'tho-z[=o]-a, _n.pl._ another name for Actinozoa, one of the
three classes of Coelenterates, including sea-anemones, corals, &c. [Gr.
_anthos_, a flower, _z[=o]a_, animals.]

ANTHRACENE, an-thra-s[=e]n', _n._ a hydrocarbon obtained as one of the last
products in the distillation of coal-tar, of value as the source of
artificial alizarin. [Gr. _anthrax_, coal, and _-ene_.]

ANTHRACITE, an'thras-[=i]t, _n._ a kind of coal that burns nearly without
flame, smell, or smoke, consisting almost entirely of carbon, and not
readily ignited.--_adjs._ ANTHRACIF'EROUS, yielding anthracite;
ANTHRACIT'IC.--_n._ ANTHRACIT'ISM. [Gr. _anthrakit[=e]s_,
coal-like--_anthrax_, coal.]

ANTHRAX, an'thraks, _n._ a widely distributed and very destructive disease,
most common among sheep and cattle, the first infectious disease proved to
be due to the presence of microscopic vegetable organisms
(_bacilli_)--other names are _Splenic Apoplexy_, _Splenic Fever_, and as it
occurs in man, _Malignant Pustule_ and _Woolsorter's Disease_: a carbuncle
or malignant boil.--_adjs._ ANTHRA'CIC, AN'THRACOID. [L.--Gr. _anthrax_;
coal, a carbuncle.]

ANTHROPICAL, an-throp'ik-al, _adj._ (_rare_) connected with human nature.
[Gr. _anthropikos_, human, _anthr[=o]pos_, man.]

ANTHROPINISM, an-thr[=o]p'in-ism, _n._ the looking at things in their
relation to man. [Gr. _anthropinos_, human (_anthr[=o]pos_), and _-ism_.]

ANTHROPOCENTRIC, an-thr[=o]-po-sent'rik, _adj._ centring all the universe
in man. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, and _kentron_, centre.]

ANTHROPOGRAPHY, an-thro-pog'ra-fi, _n._ that branch of anthropology which
treats of the human race according to its geographical distribution. [Gr.
_anthr[=o]pos_, man, _graphia_, description--_graphein_, to write.]

ANTHROPOID, an'throp-oid, _adj._ in the form of or resembling man.--_n._
the anthropoid ape, the highest and most man-like monkey.--_adj._
AN'THROPOIDAL. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, _eidos_, form.]

ANTHROPOLATRY, an-thro-pol'a-tri, _n._ the giving of divine honours to a
human being, a term always employed in reproach. It was used by the
Apollinarians against the orthodox Christians of the 4th and 5th centuries,
with reference to the doctrine of the perfect human nature of Christ. [Gr.
_anthr[=o]pos_, man, _latreia_, worship.]

ANTHROPOLITE, an-throp'o-l[=i]t, _n._ human remains turned into stone,
fossil human remains. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, _lithos_, stone.]

ANTHROPOLOGY, an-throp-ol'oj-i, _n._ the science of man, more especially
considered as a social animal: the natural history of man in its widest
sense, treating of his relation to the brutes, his evolution, the different
races, &c.--_adj._ ANTHROPOLOG'ICAL.--_adv._ ANTHROPOLOG'ICALLY.--_n._
ANTHROPOL'OGIST, one versed in anthropology. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, and
_logos_, discourse--_legein_, to say.]

ANTHROPOMETRY, an-thr[=o]-pom'et-ri, _n._ the measurement of the human body
to discover its exact dimensions and the proportions of its parts, for
comparison with its dimensions at different periods, or in different races
and classes.--_adj._ ANTHROPOMET'RIC. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, and
_metrein_, to measure.]

ANTHROPOMORPHISM, an-throp-o-morf'izm, _n._ the representation of the Deity
in the form of man or with bodily parts: the ascription to the Deity of
human affections and passions.--_adj._ ANTHROPOMORPH'IC.--_v.t._
ANTHROPOMORPH'ISE, to regard as or render anthropomorphous.--_ns._
ANTHROPOMORPH'IST; ANTHROPOMORPH'ITE; ANTHROPOMORPH'ITISM. [Gr.
_anthr[=o]pos_, man, _morph[=e]_, form.]

ANTHROPOMORPHOSIS, an-thr[=o]-po-morf-os'is, or -morf'os-is, _n._
transformation into human shape.--_adj._ ANTHROPOMORPH'OUS, formed like or
resembling man. [Gr. _anthropomorph[=o]sis_--_anthr[=o]pos_, man, and a
verb of action, formed from _morph[=e]_, shape.]

ANTHROPOPATHISM, an-thro-pop'a-thizm, _n._ the ascription to the Deity of
human passions and affections--also ANTHROPOP'ATHY.--_adj._
ANTHROPOPATH'IC.--_adv._ ANTHROPOPATH'ICALLY. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man,
_pathos_, suffering, passion.]

ANTHROPOPHAGY, an-thro-pof'aj-i, _n._ cannibalism.--_n.pl._ ANTHROPOPH'AGI,
man-eaters, cannibals.--_ns._ ANTHROPOPHAGIN'IAN (_Shak._) a cannibal;
ANTHROPOPH'AGITE.--_adj._ ANTHROPOPH'AGOUS. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man,
_phag-ein_, to eat.]

ANTHROPOPHUISM, an-thr[=o]-pof'[=u]-izm, _n._ the ascription of a human
nature to the gods. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, and _phu[=e]_, nature, and
_-ism_.]

ANTHROPOSOPHY, an-thr[=o]-pos'o-fi, _n._ the knowledge of the nature of
men: human wisdom.--_n._ ANTHROPOS'OPHIST, one furnished with the wisdom of
men. [Gr. _anthr[=o]pos_, man, and _sophia_, wisdom.]

ANTHROPOTOMY, an-thr[=o]-pot'om-i, _n._ anatomy of the human body. [Gr.
_anthr[=o]pos_, man, and _temnein_, to cut.]

ANTI, ant'i, _pfx._ against, in opposition to, rivalling, simulating. It
forms numerous derivatives, alike nouns and adjectives, as _antichrist_,
_antipope_, _anticlimax_, _anti-tobacconist_; _anti-Ritualistic_,
_anti-Semite_. [Gr. _anti_, against, instead of, &c.]

ANTIAR, an'ti-ar, _n._ the upas-tree (see UPAS). [Jav. _antjar_.]

ANTI-ATTRITION, an'ti-at-trish'on, _n._ anything which counteracts
attrition or friction--also figuratively. [Pfx. ANTI- and ATTRITION.]

ANTIBILIOUS, an'ti-bil'yus, _adj._ of use against biliousness. [ANTI- and
BILIOUS.]

ANTIBURGHER, an-ti-burg'[.e]r, _n._ that section of the Scottish Secession
Church which parted from the main body (the _Burghers_) in 1747, holding it
unlawful to take the oath administered to burgesses in Edinburgh, Glasgow,
and Perth, because of the reference to 'the true religion presently
professed within this realm.' They read into it an allusion to the Church
as by law established, while others interpreted it as signifying simply the
Protestant religion. [ANTI- and BURGHER.]

ANTIC, ant'ik, _adj._ grotesque: odd: ridiculous in shape, dress, &c.--_n._
a fantastic or ancient figure, caricaturing or combining grotesquely animal
or vegetable forms, or both together: (_Shak._) a grotesque pageant: a
buffoon, clown, mountebank: a trick, mostly in _pl._--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to
make grotesque.--_v.i._ AN'TICIZE (_Browning_), to play antics. [It.
_antico_, equivalent to It. _grottesco_, and orig. used of the fantastic
decorations composed of human and other forms found in the remains of
ancient Rome--L. _antiquus_.]

ANTICATHOLIC, an-ti-kath'o-lik, _adj._ opposed to what is Catholic. [ANTI-
and CATHOLIC.]

ANTICHLOR, an'ti-kl[=o]r, _n._ a substance used in the making of paper to
free the pulp from the injurious after-effects of chlorine. [ANTI- and
CHLOR-INE.]

ANTICHRIST, an'ti-kr[=i]st, _n._ the great opposer of Christ and
Christianity: the name of a great enemy of Christ always expected to appear
by the early Church, applied by some to the Pope and his power.--_adj._
ANTICHRISTIAN (-krist'-), relating to Antichrist: opposed to
Christianity.--_n._ ANTICHRIST'IANISM.--_adv._ ANTICHRIST'IANLY. [Gr.;
_anti_, against, and _Christ-os_.]

ANTICIPATE, an-tis'ip-[=a]t, _v.t._ to be beforehand with (another person
or thing), to forestall or preoccupy: to take in hand, or consider, before
the due time: to foresee: realise beforehand, or count upon as certain: to
expect.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to accelerate: to occur earlier than.--_adj._
and _n._ ANTIC'IPANT, anticipating, anticipative.--_n._ ANTICIP[=A]'TION,
act of anticipating: assignment to too early a time: foretaste: previous
notion, or presentiment: expectation.--_adjs._ ANTI'CIP[=A]TIVE,
ANTI'CIP[=A]TORY.--_advs._ ANTICIP[=A]'TIVELY, ANTICIP[=A]'TORILY (_rare_).
[L. _anticip[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_[=a]nte_, before, _cap-[)e]re_, to take.]

ANTICIVIC, an-ti-siv'ik, _adj._ opposed to citizenship, esp. the conception
of it engendered by the French Revolution.--_n._ ANTICIV'ISM.

ANTICLIMAX, an-ti-kl[=i]m'aks, _n._ the opposite of climax: a sentence in
which the ideas become less important towards the close: also of any
descent as against a previous rise--e.g. Waller's

  'Under the Tropicks is our language spoke,
  And part of Flanders hath receiv'd our yoke.'

[Gr. _anti_, against, and CLIMAX.]

ANTICLINAL, an-ti-kl[=i]n'al, _adj._ sloping in opposite directions.--_n._
(_geol._) applied to strata which are inclined in opposite directions from
a common axis--in a roof-like form. [Gr. _anti_, against, _klin-ein_, to
lean.]

ANTICYCLONE, an-ti-s[=i]'kl[=o]n, _n._ name given to the rotatory flow of
air from an atmospheric area of high pressure.--_adj._ ANTICYCLON'IC.
[ANTI- and CYCLONE.]

ANTIDOTE, an'ti-d[=o]t, _n._ that which is given against anything that
would produce bad effects: a counter-poison: (_fig._) anything that
prevents evil (with _against_, _for_, _to_).--_adj._ AN'TIDOTAL. [Gr.
_antidotos_--_anti_, against, _did[=o]mi_, to give.]

ANTIENT. See ANCIENT.

ANTIFEBRILE, an-ti-feb'r[=i]l, _adj._ efficacious against fever.--_n._ a
substance with such properties.--Also ANTIFEBRIF'IC.

ANTI-FEDERAL, an-ti-fed'e-ral, _adj._ opposed to federalism; applied to the
U.S. party whose fundamental principle was opposition to the strengthening
of the national government at the expense of the States. Later names for
the party were Republican, Democratic Republican, and Democratic
alone.--_ns._ ANTI-FED'ERALISM; ANTI-FED'ERALIST.

ANTIFRICTION, an-ti-frik'shun, _n._ anything which prevents friction.
[ANTI- and FRICTION.]

ANTI-GALLICAN, an-ti-gal'ik-an, _adj._ and _n._ opposed to what is French:
or esp. opposed to the Gallican liberties of the French Church.--_n._
ANTI-GALL'ICANISM. [ANTI- and GALLICAN.]

ANTIGROPELOS, an-ti-gr[=o]p'el-os, _n._ waterproof leggings. [Said to be
made up from Gr. _anti_, against, _hygros_, wet, and _p[=e]los_, mud. Prob.
this barbarous word was orig. an advertisement.]

ANTIHELIX, an'ti-h[=e]-liks, _n._ the inner curved ridge of the pinna of
the ear:--_pl._ ANTIH[=E]L'ICES.--Also AN'THELIX.

ANTI-JACOBIN, an'ti-jak'o-bin, _adj._ opposed to the Jacobins, a party in
the French Revolution, hence an opponent of the French Revolution, or of
democratic principles.--_n._ one opposed to the Jacobins: a weekly paper
started in England in 1797 by Canning and others to refute the principles
of the French Revolution.--_n._ AN'TI-JAC'OBINISM. [ANTI- and JACOBIN.]

ANTILEGOMENA, an-ti-leg-om'en-a, _n.pl._ a term applied to those books of
the New Testament not at first accepted by the whole Christian Church, but
ultimately admitted into the Canon--the seven books of 2 Peter, James,
Jude, Hebrews, 2 and 3 John, and the Apocalypse.--The other books were
called _Homologoumena_, 'agreed to.' [Gr., lit. 'spoken against.']

ANTILOGARITHM, an-ti-log'a-rithm, _n._ the complement of the logarithm of a
sine, tangent, or secant. [ANTI- and LOGARITHM.]

ANTILOGY, an-til'o-ji, _n._ a contradiction. [Gr. _antilogia_,
contradiction, _antilegein_, to contradict.]

ANTIMACASSAR, an-ti-mak-as'ar, _n._ a covering for sofas, cushions, &c., to
protect them from grease, esp. in the hair, also for ornament. [ANTI- and
MACASSAR.]

ANTIMASK, ANTIMASQUE, an'ti-mask, _n._ a ridiculous interlude dividing the
parts of the more serious mask. [Gr. _anti_, against, and MASK.]

ANTIMETABOLE, an-ti-me-tab'ol-e, _n._ (_rhet._) a figure in which the same
words or ideas are repeated in inverse order, as Quarles's 'Be wisely
worldly, but not worldly wise.' [Gr.]

ANTIMETATHESIS, an'ti-me-tath'e-sis, _n._ inversion of the members of an
antithesis, as in Crabbe's 'A poem is a speaking picture; a picture, a mute
poem.' [Gr.]

ANTIMNEMONIC, an-ti-ne-mon'ik, _adj._ and _n._ tending to weaken the
memory. [ANTI- and MNEMONIC.]

ANTIMONARCHICAL, an-ti-mon-ark'i-kal, _adj._ opposed to monarchy and
monarchical principles.--_n._ ANTIMON'ARCHIST. [ANTI- and MONARCHICAL.]

ANTIMONY, an'ti-mun-i, _n._ a brittle, bluish-white metal of flaky,
crystalline texture, much used in the arts and in medicine.--_adjs._
ANTIM[=O]N'IAL, ANTIMON'IC. [Through Fr. from Low L. _antimonium_, of
unknown origin, prob. a corr. of some Arabic word.]

ANTI-NATIONAL, an-ti-nash'un-al, _adj._ hostile to one's nation.

ANTINEPHRITIC, an-ti-ne-frit'ik, _adj._ acting against diseases of the
kidney. [Gr. _anti_, against, and NEPHRITIC.]

ANTINOMIANISM, an-ti-n[=o]m'i-an-izm, _n._ the belief that Christians are
emancipated by the gospel from the obligation to keep the moral law--a
monstrous abuse and perversion of the Pauline doctrine of justification by
faith, esp. applied to the party of Johann Agricola in the German
Reformation.--_n._ and _adj._ ANTINOM'IAN, against the law: pertaining to
the Antinomians. [Gr. _anti_, against, _nomos_, a law.]

ANTINOMY, an'ti-nom-i, or an-tin'o-mi, _n._ a contradiction in a law: a
conflict of authority: conclusions discrepant though apparently
logical.--_adjs._ ANTIN[=O]'MIC, ANTIN[=O]'MICAL. [Gr. _anti_, against,
_nomos_, a law.]

ANTINOUS, an-tin'[=o]-us, _n._ an ideal of youthful manly beauty, from the
name of the favourite of the Roman emperor Hadrian so famous in ancient
art.

ANTIOCHIAN, an-ti-[=o]'ki-an, _adj._ of or pertaining to the city of
Antioch, or the eclectic system in philosophy of Antiochus of
Ascalon.--_n._ ANTI[=O]'CHIANISM, a school of theology in the 4th and 5th
centuries which spread over the whole Græco-Syrian Church, and was a revolt
against the allegorical interpretation of Scripture favoured by the
Alexandrian school.

ANTIODONTALGIC, an-ti-[=o]-dont-alj'ik, _adj._ of use against toothache.
[Gr. _anti_, against, _odous_, tooth, and _algein_, to suffer pain.]

ANTIPATHY, an-tip'ath-i, _n._ dislike: repugnance: opposition: the object
of antipathy (with _against_, _to_, _between_ of persons).--_adjs._
ANTIPATHET'IC, -AL; ANTIPATH'IC, belonging to antipathy: opposite:
contrary.--_n._ ANTIP'ATHIST, one possessed by an antipathy. [Gr. _anti_,
against, _pathos_, feeling.]

ANTIPERIODIC, an-ti-p[=e]-ri-od'ik, _adj._ destroying the periodicity of
diseases, such as ague, whose attacks recur at regular intervals: a drug
with such an effect, esp. cinchona bark and its alkaloids (quinine), and
arsenic.

ANTIPERISTALTIC, an-ti-per-i-stal'tik, _adj._ contrary to peristaltic
motion: acting upwards. [ANTI- and PERISTALTIC.]

ANTIPERISTASIS, an-ti-per-ist'a-sis, _n._ opposition of circumstances:
resistance exerted against any train of circumstances. [Gr.; _anti_,
against, and _peristasis_, a circumstance--_peri_, around, and
_hist[=e]mi_, make to stand.]

ANTIPHLOGISTIC, an-ti-floj-ist'ik, _adj._ of remedies acting against heat,
or inflammation, as blood-letting, purgatives, low diet.--_n._ a medicine
to allay inflammation. [ANTI- and PHLOGISTIC.]

ANTIPHON, an'tif-[=o]n, _n._ alternate chanting or singing: a species of
sacred song, sung by two parties, each responding to the other--also
ANTIPH'ONY.--_adj._ ANTIPH'ONAL, pertaining to antiphony.--_n._ a book of
antiphons or anthems--also ANTIPH'ONARY and ANTIPH'ONER.--_adjs._
ANTIPHON'IC, ANTIPHON'ICAL, mutually responsive.--_adv._ ANTIPHON'ICALLY.
[Gr.; _anti_, in return, and _ph[=o]n[=e]_, voice. A doublet of ANTHEM.]

ANTIPHRASIS, an-tif'ra-sis, _n._ (_rhet._) the use of words in a sense
opposite to the true one.--_adjs._ ANTIPHRAS'TIC, -AL, involving
antiphrasis: ironical.--_adv._ ANTIPHRAS'TICALLY. [Gr.; _anti_, against,
_phrasis_, speech.]

ANTIPODES, an-tip'od-[=e]z, _n.pl._ those living on the other side of the
globe, and whose feet are thus opposite to ours: the inhabitants of any two
opposite points of the globe: places on the earth's surface exactly
opposite each other, the region opposite one's own: the exact opposite of a
person or thing:--_sing._ AN'TIPODE.--_adjs._ ANTIP'ODAL,
ANTIPOD[=E]'AN.--AT ANTIPODES, in direct opposition. [Gr. _anti_, opposite
to, _pous_, _podos_, a foot.]

ANTIPOLE, an'ti-p[=o]l, _n._ the opposite pole: direct opposite. [ANTI- and
POLE.]

ANTIPOPE, an'ti-p[=o]p, _n._ a pontiff elected in opposition to one
canonically chosen, e.g. those who resided at Avignon in the 13th and 14th
centuries. [Gr. _anti_, against, and POPE.]

ANTIPOPULAR, an-ti-pop'[=u]-lar, _adj._ adverse to the people or the
popular cause. [ANTI- and POPULAR.]

ANTIPYRIN, an-ti-p[=i]'rin, _n._ a white crystalline powder, tasteless,
colourless, and soluble in water, obtained from coal-tar products by a
complex process, with valuable qualities as a febrifuge, but not as an
antiperiodic.--_adj._ ANTIPYRET'IC.

ANTIQUARY, an'ti-kwar-i, _n._ one who studies or collects old things, esp.
the monuments and relics of the past--but not very ancient things, and
rather from curiosity than archæological interest.--_adj._ (_Shak._)
ancient.--_adj._ and _n._ ANTIQU[=A]R'IAN, connected with the study of
antiquities, also one devoted to the study.--_n._ ANTIQU[=A]R'IANISM. [See
ANTIQUE.]

ANTIQUE, an-t[=e]k', _adj._ ancient: of a good old age, olden (now
generally rhetorical in a good sense): old-fashioned, after the manner of
the ancients.--_n._ anything very old: ancient relics: an American name for
a kind of type of thick and bold face in which the lines are of equal
thickness--_Egyptian_ in England.--_v.t._ AN'TIQUATE, to make antique, old,
or obsolete: to put out of use:--_pr.p._ an'tiqu[=a]ting; _pa.p._
an'tiqu[=a]ted.--_adj._ AN'TIQUATED, grown old, or out of fashion:
obsolete: superannuated.--_n._ ANTIQU[=A]'TION, the making obsolete:
abrogation: obsoleteness.--_adv._ ANTIQUE'LY.--_n._ ANTIQUE'NESS.--_adj._
ANTIQ'UISH, somewhat antique.--THE ANTIQUE, ancient work in art, the style
of ancient art. [Fr.--L. _antiquus_, old, ancient--_ante_, before.]

ANTIQUITY, an-tik'wi-ti, _n._ ancient times, esp. the times of the ancient
Greeks and Romans: great age: (_Shak._) old age, seniority: ancient style:
the people of old time: (_pl._) manners, customs, relics of ancient
times.--_n._ ANTIQUIT[=A]R'IAN, one attached to the practices and opinions
of antiquity. [Fr.--L. _antiquitat-em_--_antiquus_, ancient.]

ANTIRRHINUM, an-tir-r[=i]'num, _n._ the genus of plants to which Snapdragon
belongs. [Neo-Latin, from Gr. _anti_, opposite, and _ris_, _rinos_, nose;
from its resemblance to a beast's mouth.]

ANTISCIAN, an-tish'i-an, _adj._ of or pertaining to people living on
different sides of the equator, whose shadows at noon fall in opposite
directions.--_n.pl._ ANTIS'CI[=I]. [Gr.; _anti_, opposite, _skia_, a
shadow.]

ANTISCORBUTIC, an-ti-skor-b[=u]t'ik, _adj._ acting against scurvy.--_n._ a
remedy for scurvy. [Gr. _anti_, against, and SCORBUTIC.]

ANTISCRIPTURAL, an-ti-skrip't[=u]r-al, _adj._ opposed to Holy Scripture.
[ANTI- and SCRIPTURAL.]

ANTI-SEMITES, an'ti-sem'[=i]ts, _n.pl._ the modern opponents of the Jews in
Russia, Roumania, Hungary, and Eastern Germany.--_adj._ ANTISEMIT'IC.

ANTISEPTIC, an-ti-sept'ik, _adj._ and _n._ counteracting putrefaction and
analogous fermentive changes: preventing moral decay.--_adv._
ANTISEPT'ICALLY. [Gr. _anti_, against, and _s[=e]pein_, to rot.]

ANTISOCIAL, an-ti-s[=o]sh'al, _adj._ opposed to the principles and usages
of society. [ANTI- and SOCIAL.]

ANTISPASMODIC, an-ti-spaz-mod'ik, _adj._ opposing spasms or
convulsions.--_n._ a remedy for spasms or convulsions. [Gr. _anti_,
against, and SPASMODIC.]

ANTISPAST, an'ti-spast, _n._ in metre, a foot composed of an iambus and a
trochee.--_adj._ ANTISPAST'IC. [Gr. _antispastos_, _antispa-ein_, to draw
into a contrary direction.]

ANTISTROPHE, an-tis'tr[=o]f-e, _n._ (_poet._) the returning movement from
left to right in Greek choruses and dances, the movement of the strophe
being from right to left: the stanza of a song alternating with the
strophe: an inverse relation.--_adj._ ANTISTROPH'IC, pertaining to the
antistrophe. [Gr.; _anti_, against, and _streph-ein_, to turn.]

ANTITHEISM, an-ti-th[=e]'izm, _n._ the doctrine which denies the existence
of a God.--_n._ ANTITH[=E]'IST.--_adj._ ANTITHEIST'IC.

ANTITHESIS, an-tith'e-sis, _n._ a figure in which thoughts or words are set
in contrast: a counter-thesis, counter-proposition: opposition: the
contrast:--_pl._ ANTITH'ES[=E]S.--_n._ ANT'ITHET (_rare_), an instance of
antithesis.--_adjs._ ANTITHET'IC, -AL.--_adv._ ANTITHET'ICALLY. [Gr.;
_anti_, against, _tith[=e]mi_, to place.]

ANTITOXIN, an-ti-tok'sin, _n._ the name applied to substances present in
the blood of an animal which neutralise the action of toxins or bacterial
poisons.--_adj._ ANTITOX'IC.

ANTITRADE, an'ti-tr[=a]d, _n._ a wind that blows in the opposite direction
to the trade-wind--that is, in the northern hemisphere from south-west, and
in the southern hemisphere from north-west.

ANTITRINITARIAN, an-ti-trin-it-[=a]r'i-an, _n._ and _adj._ opposed to the
doctrine of the Trinity.--_n._ ANTITRINITAR'IANISM.

ANTITYPE, an'ti-t[=i]p, _n._ that which corresponds to the type: that which
is prefigured by the type, as Christ by the paschal lamb.--_adjs._
ANTITYP'AL, -TYP'ICAL.

ANTLER, ant'l[.e]r, _n._ a bony outgrowth from the frontal bones of
deer--restricted to males, except in the reindeer: branch of a stag's
horn.--_adj._ ANT'LERED. [O. Fr. _antoillier_--Late L. _ant(e)ocular-em_
(_ramum_), the branch of a stag's horn in front of the eyes.]

ANT-LION, ant'-l[=i]'on, _n._ the larva of an insect of the order
Neuroptera, remarkable for the ingenuity of its insect-catching habits.
[Trans. of Gr. _murm[=e]kole[=o]n_ in the Septuagint; _murm[=e]x_, ant,
_le[=o]n_, lion.]

ANTONOMASIA, ant-on-om-[=a]z'i-a, _n._ a figure of speech which uses an
epithet on the name of an office or attributive for a person's proper name,
e.g. his lordship for an earl; and conversely, e.g. a Napoleon for a great
conqueror. [Gr.; _anti_, instead, and _onomazein_, to name, _onoma_, a
name.]

ANTONYM, ant'[=o]-nim, _n._ a word which is the opposite of another. [Gr.
_anti_, against, _onoma_, a name.]

ANTRE, an't[.e]r, _n._ a cave or grotto. [Fr.; L. _antrum_, a cave.]

ANURA, a-n[=u]'ra, _n.pl._ tailless amphibia, as the frog and toad.--Also
ANOU'RA. [Gr. _an-_, priv., _oura_, tail.]

ANUS, [=a]n'us, _n._ the lower orifice of the bowels. [L., for _as-nus_,
'sitting-part,' from root _as_, to sit.]

ANVIL, an'vil, _n._ an iron block on which smiths hammer metal into
shape.--ON or UPON THE ANVIL, in preparation, under discussion. [A.S.
_anfilte_, _on filte_; _on_, on, and a supposed _filtan_, to weld,
appearing also in FELT.]

ANXIOUS, angk'shus, _adj._ uneasy regarding something doubtful:
solicitous.--_n._ ANX[=I]'ETY, state of being anxious--_adv._
AN'XIOUSLY.--_n._ AN'XIOUSNESS. [L. _anxius_--_ang-[)e]re_, to press
tightly. See ANGER, ANGUISH.]

ANY, en'ni, _adj._ one indefinitely: some: whoever. _n._ AN'YBODY, any
single individual.--_adv._ ANYHOW, in any way whatever: in any case, at
least.--_ns._ AN'YTHING, a thing indefinitely, as opposed to nothing: any
whit, to any extent; ANYTHING[=A]'RIAN, one with no beliefs in particular;
ANYTHING[=A]'RIANISM--_advs._ AN'YWAY, AN'YWAYS, in any manner: anyhow: in
any case; AN'YWHERE, AN'YWHEN, in any place whatever, at any time;
AN'YWISE, in any manner, to any degree.--ANY ONE, any single individual,
anybody.--AT ANY RATE, whatever may happen, at all events.--IF ANYTHING, if
in any degree. [A.S. _ænig_--_an_, one.]

AONIAN, [=a]-[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Aonia_ in Greece, or to the
Muses supposed to dwell there.--AONIAN FOUNT, the fountain Aganippe, on a
slope of Mount Helicon--the Æonian mount.

AORIST, [=a]'or-ist, _n._ the name of certain tenses in the Greek verb
expressing indefinite time.--_adj._ AORIST'IC. [Gr. _aoristos_,
indefinite--_a_, neg., and _horistos_, _horizein_, _horos_, a limit.]

AORTA, [=a]-or'ta, _n._ the great arterial trunk which, rising from the
left ventricle of the heart, sends its branches ramifying through the whole
body--in man subdivided into the _arch_, the _thoracic aorta_, and the
_abdominal aorta_.--_adjs._ AOR'TAL, AOR'TIC. [Gr. _aort[=e]_--_aeir-ein_,
to raise up.]

APACE, a-p[=a]s', _adv._ at a quick pace: swiftly: fast: said of the flight
of time generally. [Prep. _a_, and PACE.]

APAGOGIC, -AL, ap-a-goj'ik, -al, _adj._ proving indirectly by an _apagoge_
or reduction to an absurdity, the truth of the thesis being evinced through
the falsehood of its opposite--opposed to _direct_ or _ostensive_ proof.
[Gr. _apag[=o]g[=e]_, leading away, abduction, _apagein_, to lead off.]

APANAGE. See APPANAGE.

APART, a-pärt', _adv._ separately: aside: asunder, parted: separate: away
from all employment: out of consideration, not considered for the moment
(with _from_).--_n._ APART'NESS.--TO SET APART, to separate, consecrate.
[Fr. _à part_--L. _a parte_, from the part or side.]

APARTMENT, a-pärt'ment, _n._ a separate room in a house occupied by a
particular person or party: (_arch._) a suite or set of such rooms--now in
this sense the _pl._: (_obs._) a compartment.--_adj._ APARTMENT'AL. [Fr.
_appartement_, a suite of rooms forming a complete dwelling, through Low
L., from L. _ad_, and _part[=i]re_, to divide--_pars_, a part.]

APATHY, ap'ath-i, _n._ want of feeling: absence of passion:
indifference.--_adjs._ APATHET'IC, APATHET'ICAL (_rare_).--_adv._
APATHET'ICALLY. [Gr.; _a_, neg., _pathos_, feeling.]

APATITE, ap'a-t[=i]t, _n._ a phosphate of lime of great variety of colour.
[Gr. _apat[=e]_, deceit, its form and colour being deceptive.]

APAY, a-p[=a]', _v.t._ (_arch._) to satisfy, content: (_obs._) to repay.
[O. Fr. _apayer_, from L. _ad_, and _pac[=a]re_ _pac-em_, peace.]

APE, [=a]p, _n._ a monkey: a monkey without a tail or with a very short
one: a simian proper, linking man and the lower animals, and hence termed
_Anthropoid_--gorilla, chimpanzee, orang-outang, or gibbon: one who plays
the ape, a silly imitator: (_Shak._) an imitator in a good or neutral
sense.--_v.t._ to imitate as an ape.--_ns._ APE'DOM; APE'HOOD; AP'ERY,
conduct of one who apes, any ape-like action: a colony of apes.--_adj._
AP'ISH, like an ape: imitative: foppish.--_adv._ AP'ISHLY.--_ns._
AP'ISHNESS, AP'ISM (_Carlyle_).--GOD'S APE, a born fool.--TO LEAD APES IN
HELL, believed to be the lot of old maids there; TO MAKE ANY ONE HIS APE,
TO PUT AN APE IN HIS HOOD (_obs._), to make a fool of any one. [A.S. _apa_;
Ger. _affe_.]

APEAK, APEEK, a-p[=e]k', _adv._ (_naut._) vertical--the anchor is apeak
when the cable is drawn so as to bring the ship's bow directly over it.
[_a_, to, and PEAK.]

APELLES, a-pel'ez, _n._ any consummate artist, from the great Greek painter
_Apelles_, under Alexander the Great.

APEPSY, a-pep'si, APEPSIA, a-pep'si-a, _n._ weakness of digestion. [Gr.
_apepsia_, indigestion; _a_, priv., _peptein_, to digest.]

APERÇU, a-per's[=oo], _n._ a summary exposition: a brief outline. [Fr.
_aperçu_, pa.p. of _apercevoir_, to perceive.]

APERIENT, a-p[=e]'-ri-ent, _adj._ opening: mildly purgative.--_n._ any
laxative medicine. [L. _aperientem_, _aper[=i]re_, to open.]

APERT, a-pert', _adj._ (_arch._) open, public--opp. to _Privy_.--_n._
APERT'NESS. [L. _apert-um_, pa.p. of _aper[=i]re_, to open.]

APERTURE, a'p[.e]rt-[=u]r, _n._ an opening: the space through which light
passes in an optical instrument: a hole. [L. _apertura_--_aper[=i]re_, to
open.]

APETALOUS, a-pet'al-us, _adj._ (_bot._) without petals. [Gr. _a_, neg., and
_petalon_, a petal.]

APEX, [=a]'peks, _n._ the summit or point: the vertex of a triangle: the
culminating point, climax of anything:--_pl._ APEXES ([=a]'peks-ez), APICES
(ap'i-s[=e]z). [L. _apex_, the peak of the flamen's cap.]

APHÆRESIS, APHERESIS, a-fer'i-sis, _n._ (_gram._) the taking away of a
letter or syllable at the beginning of a word. [Gr. _aphairesis_, a taking
away, _apo_, away, and _haire-ein_, to take.]

APHANIPTERA, af-an-ip't[.e]r-a, _n.pl._ a small order of insects having but
rudimentary scales in place of wings.--_adj._ APHANIP'TEROUS. [Gr.
_aphan[=e]s_, invisible, _pteron_, wing.]

APHASIA, a-f[=a]'zi-a, _n._ inability to express thought in words by reason
of some brain disease: or, more widely still, the loss of the faculty of
interchanging thought, without any affection of the intellect or
will.--_adj._ APHAS'IC. [Gr.; _a_, neg., _phasis_, speech--_phanai_, to
speak.]

APHELION, a-f[=e]'li-on, _n._ the point of a planet's orbit farthest away
from the sun:--_pl._ APH[=E]'LIA. [Gr. _apo_, from, _h[=e]lios_, the sun.]

APHELIOTROPIC, a-f[=e]-li-o-trop'ik, _adj._ turning away from the sun. [Gr.
_apo_, away, _h[=e]lios_, sun, and _tropikos_, belonging to
turning--_trep-ein_, to turn.]

APHEMIA, a-f[=e]m'i-a, _n._ loss of speech caused by difficulty in
articulation due to paralysis. [Gr. _a_, neg., and _ph[=e]m[=e]_, voice,
fame--_phanai_, to speak.]

APHERESIS. See APHÆRESIS.

APHESIS, af'es-is, _n._ the gradual loss of an unaccented vowel at the
beginning of a word, as in _squire_ = _esquire_--a special form of
Aphæresis.--_adj._ APHET'IC. [Coined by Dr Murray. Gr.]

APHIS, [=a]'fis, _n._ a family of small 'plant-lice' belonging to the order
of hemipterous insects, occurring in temperate regions as parasites on the
roots, leaves, stems, &c. of plants. Some kinds are tended, protected, and
imprisoned by ants for the 'honey-dew' which they secrete, hence called
Ant-cows:--_pl._ APHIDES (af'i-d[=e]z).--_adj._ and _n._ APHID'IAN. [Ety.
unknown; one conjecture connects the word with Gr. _apheideis_, unsparing
(_a_, neg., and _pheidomai_, to spare), from the remarkable rapidity of
propagation.]

APHONY, af-on-i, _n._ loss of voice: dumbness--the more common form is
APH[=O]'NIA.--_adjs._ APHON'IC, APHON'OUS, voiceless. [Gr. _a_, neg.,
_ph[=o]n[=e]_, voice.]

APHORISM, af'or-izm, _n._ a concise statement of a principle in any
science: a brief, pithy saying: an adage.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ APH'ORISE, to
coin or use aphorisms.--_ns._ APH'ORISER; APH'ORIST, a writer of
aphorisms.--_adj._ APHORIS'TIC, in the form of an aphorism.--_adv._
APHORIST'ICALLY. [Gr. _aphorizein_, to mark off by boundaries--_apo_, from,
and _horos_, a limit.]

APHRODISIAC, af-ro-diz'-i-ak, _adj._ exciting to sexual intercourse.--_n._
that which excites to sexual intercourse.--_adj._ APHRODIS'IAN, belonging
to Venus, devoted to sensual love. [Gr. _aphrodisiakos_--_Aphrodit[=e]_,
Venus, the goddess of love.]

APHTHÆ, af'th[=e], _n.pl._ small whitish ulcers on the surface of a mucous
membrane. [Gr. _aphtha_, mostly in pl. _aphthai_, usually connected with
_hapt-ein_, to set on fire.]

APHYLLOUS, a-fil'us, _adj._ (_bot._) destitute of leaves. [Gr. _a_, neg.,
_phyllon_, a leaf.]

APIARY, [=a]p'i-ar-i, _n._ a place where bees are kept.--_adjs._ APIAR'IAN,
AP'IAN, relating to bees or bee-keeping.--_n._ AP'IARIST, one who keeps an
apiary: one who studies the habits of bees. [L. _apiarium_--_apis_, a bee.]

APICAL, ap'ik-al, _adj._ relating to the apex, or top.--_adv._ AP'ICALLY.
[See APEX.]

APICES. See APEX.

APICIAN, a-pish'yan, _adj._ relating to _Apicius_, the Roman epicurean in
the time of Tiberius: luxurious and expensive in diet.

APICULTURE, [=a]'pi-cult-[=u]r, _n._ bee-keeping. [L. _apis_, bee, and
_cultura_, keeping--_col[)e]re_, to keep.]

APIECE, a-p[=e]s', _adv._ for each piece, thing, or person: to each
individually.--_adv._ APIEC'ES (_obs._), in pieces.

APINCH, a-pinsh', _adv._ pinching, so as to pinch. [Prep. _a_, and PINCH.]

APLACENTAL, ap-la-sen'tal, _adj._ having no placenta. [_a_ and PLACENTAL.
See PLACENTA.]

APLOMB, a-plom', _n._ the perpendicular, perpendicularity: self-possession,
coolness. [Fr. _aplomb_, perpendicular position--_à plomb_, according to
plummet.]

[Illustration]

APLUSTRE, ap-lus't[.e]r, _n._ the ornament rising above the stern of
ancient ships, often a sheaf of volutes. [L.--Gr. _aphlaston_.]

APNOEA, ap-n[=e]'a, _n._ a cessation of breathing. [Gr. _apnoia_.]

APOCALYPSE, a-pok'al-ips, _n._ the name of the last book of the New
Testament containing the 'revelation' granted to St John: any revelation or
disclosure.--_ns._ APOC'ALYPST, APOC'ALYPT, a revealer of the
future.--_adjs._ APOCALYPT'IC, -AL.--_adv._ APOCALYPT'ICALLY.--_n._
APOCALYPT'IST, the writer of the Apocalypse.--APOCALYPTIC NUMBER, the
mystical number 666, spoken of in the Apocalypse. The best solution of the
riddle is Neron Kesar--Hebrew form of the Latin Nero Cæsar. The vowels _e_
and _a_ are not expressed in the ancient Hebrew writing: accordingly NeRON
KeSaR gives

  N     R    O   N     K    S     R
  50 + 200 + 6 + 50 + 100 + 60 + 200 = 666.

[Gr.; a revelation, an uncovering--_apo_, from, _kalypt-ein_, to cover.]

APOCARPOUS, ap-o-kär'pus, _adj._ (_bot._) having the carpels distinct. [Gr.
_apo_, from, _karpos_, fruit.]

APOCATASTASIS, a-po-ka-tast'a-sis, _n._ (_theol._) the final restitution of
all things, when at the appearance of the Messiah the kingdom of God shall
be extended over the whole earth--an idea extended by Origen to imply the
final conversion and salvation of all created beings, the devil and his
angels not excepted. [Gr.; _apo-kathistanai_, to set up again.]

APOCOPATE, a-pok'o-p[=a]t, _v.t._ to cut off the last letter or syllable of
a word:--_pr.p._ apoc'op[=a]ting; _pa.p._ apoc'op[=a]ted.--_ns._
APOCOP[=A]'TION; APOCOPE (a-pok'op-[=e]), _n._ the cutting off of the last
letter or syllable of a word. [Gr. _apo_, off, _koptein_, to cut.]

APOCRYPHA, a-pok'rif-a, _n._ as applied to religious writings = (1) those
suitable for the initiated only; (2) those of unknown date and origin; (3)
those which are spurious--the term generally means the fourteen books or
parts of books known as the Apocrypha of the Old Testament--found in the
Septuagint but not the Hebrew or Palestinian canon:--(1) First, or Third,
Esdras; (2) Second, or Fourth, Esdras; (3) Tobit; (4) Judith; (5) the parts
of Esther not found in Hebrew or Chaldee; (6) The Wisdom of Solomon; (7)
The Wisdom of Jesus, the son of Sirach, or Ecclesiasticus; (8) Baruch; (9)
The Song of the Three Holy Children; (10) The History of Susannah; (11) Bel
and the Dragon; (12) The Prayer of Manasses, king of Judah; (13) First
Maccabees; (14) Second Maccabees. The Apocryphal books of the New
Testament, as the Protevangelium of James, the Gospel of Thomas, the Gesta
Pilati, &c., stand on quite a different footing, never having been accepted
by any as canonical, or in any way authoritative: hidden or secret
things.--_adj._ APOC'RYPHAL, of doubtful authority. [Gr., 'things
hidden'--_apo_, from, _krypt-ein_, to hide.]

APODAL, ap'od-al, _adj._ without feet: without ventral fins. [Gr. _a_,
neg., _pous_, _podos_, a foot.]

APODEICTIC, a-po-d[=i]k'tik, _adj._ a logical term signifying a proposition
which is necessarily true--demonstrative without demonstration, beyond
contradiction--opp. to _Dialectic_.--_adj._ APODEIC'TICAL.--_adv._
APODEIC'TICALLY. [Gr. _apodeiktikos_--_apodeiknunai_ (_apo_ and
_deiknunai_), to show off, demonstrate.]

APODIABOLOSIS, a-po-di-a-bol'o-sis, _n._ (_rare_--_Hare_) lowering to the
rank of a devil. [Gr. _apo_, and _diabolos_, devil. Formed like
APOTHEOSIS.]

APODOSIS, a-pod'o-sis, _n._ (_gram._) the consequent clause in a
conditional sentence, as opp. to the _Protasis_. [Gr.; _apo_, back,
_didonai_, to give.]

APODYTERIUM, a-po-di-t[=e]r'i-um, _n._ the apartment in an ancient bath
where the clothes were deposited. [Gr.; _apodyein_ (_apo_, from, and
_dy-ein_), to undress.]

APOGEE, ap'o-j[=e], _n._ properly the greatest distance of the earth from
any of the heavenly bodies (the earth being regarded as the centre of the
universe in the old Ptolemaic astronomy), now restricted to the sun and
moon, the sun's apogee corresponding to the earth's aphelion, and the
moon's being the point of its orbit farthest from the earth: the highest
point, climax--opp. to _Perigee_.--_adjs._ APOGÆ'IC, APOG[=E]'AN;
APOGEOTROP'IC, turning away from the ground (of leaves, &c.).--_adv._
APOGEOTROP'ICALLY.--_n._ APOGE[=O]T'ROPISM. [Gr. _apogaion_; _apo_, from,
_g[=e]_, the earth.]

APOGRAPH, a'po-graf, _n._ an exact copy. [Gr. _apographon_, a
copy--_apo-graph-ein_, to write off, copy.]

APOLAUSTIC, a-po-law'stik, _adj._ devoted to the search of enjoyment.--_n._
the philosophy of the pleasurable. [Gr. _apolaustikos_--_apolau-ein_, to
enjoy.]

APOLLINARIANISM, a-pol-i-n[=a]'ri-an-izm, _n._ the doctrine that the
_Logos_, or divine nature in Christ, took the place of the rational human
soul or mind, and that the body of Christ was a spiritualised and glorified
form of humanity--taught by Apollinaris the younger, Bishop of Laodicea in
Syria (died 390 A.D.), condemned as denying the _true_ human nature of
Christ by the second Oecumenical Council at Constantinople (381).--_adj._
APOLLIN[=A]'RIAN.

APOLLONIAN, a-po-l[=o]n'i-an, _adj._ having the characteristics of Apollo,
sun-god of the Greeks and Romans, patron of poetry and music: named from
_Apollonius_ of Perga, who studied conic sections in the time of Ptolemy
Philopator.--Also APOLLON'IC.

APOLLONICON, a-pol-[=o]n'i-kon, _n._ a chamber organ of vast power,
supplied with both keys and barrels, first exhibited in 1817. [Formed from
_Apollonic_, as _harmonicon_ from _harmonic_.]

APOLLYON, a-pol'yun, _n._ the destroyer: Satan (same as ABADDON, Rev. ix.
11). [Gr. _apolly[=o]n_, destroying utterly; _apolly-ein_, _apo-_, and
_ollynai_, to destroy.]

APOLOGETIC, -AL, a-pol-oj-et'ik, -al, _adj._ excusing: regretfully
acknowledging: said or written in defence.--_adv._ APOLOGET'ICALLY.--_n._
APOLOGET'ICS, that branch of theology concerned with the defence of
Christianity. It falls under the two heads of _natural_ and _revealed_
theology--in the former it proves the existence of God, of the soul in man,
a future state; in the latter, the canonicity, inspiration, and
trustworthiness of Scripture.

APOLOGUE, a'pol-og, _n._ a fable, parable, or short allegorical story,
intended to serve as a pleasant vehicle for some moral doctrine--applied
more particularly to one in which the actors are animals or inanimate
things, e.g. the apologue of Jotham in Judges, ix. 7-15. [Fr.--Gr.
_apologos_, a fable--_apo_, from, _logos_, speech.]

APOLOGY, a-pol'oj-i, _n._ something spoken to ward off an attack: a defence
or justification: frank acknowledgment of an offence: a poor substitute
(with _for_; _of_ is obsolete).--_v.i._ APOL'OGISE, to make excuse: to
express regret for a fault (with _for_).--_n._ APOL'OGIST, one who makes an
apology: a defender by argument. [Gr.; _apo_, from, _-logia_,
speaking--_leg-ein_, to speak.]

APOMORPHIA, a-po-morf'i-a, _n._ an alkaloid prepared from morphia by
heating hydrochloric acid--a rapid and powerful emetic. [Gr. _apo_, from,
and MORPHIA.]

APOOP, a-p[=oo]p', _adv._ on the poop, astern.

APOPETALOUS, ap-o-pet'al-us, _adj._ (_bot._) having distinct or free
petals. [Gr. _apo_, away, and _petalon_, a leaf.]

APOPHLEGMATIC, a-po-fleg-mat'ik, _adj._ and _n._ promoting the removal of
phlegm. [Gr. _apo-_, and PHLEGMATIC.]

APOPHTHEGM, APOTHEGM, a'po-them, _n._ a pithy saying, more short, pointed,
and practical than the aphorism need be, e.g. 'God helps them that help
themselves.'---_adjs._ APOPHTHEGMAT'IC, -AL, pertaining to the nature of an
apophthegm, pithy, sententious.--_adv._ APOPHTHEGMAT'ICALLY.--_v.i._
APOPHTHEG'MATISE, to speak in apophthegms.--_n._ APOPHTHEG'MATIST. [Gr.
_apophthegma_--_apo_, forth, and _phthengesthai_, to utter.]

APOPLEXY, a'po-pleks-i, _n._ loss of sensation and of motion by a sudden
stroke, generally applied by modern medical writers to rupture of a
blood-vessel, with hemorrhage in the brain or its membranes, whether with
or without consciousness--also figuratively.--_adjs._ APOPLEC'TIC, -AL,
pertaining to or causing apoplexy: suffering from, or likely to suffer
from, apoplexy.--_adv._ APOPLEC'TICALLY.--_n._ AP'OPLEX (_arch._),
apoplexy.--_adj._ AP'OPLEXED (_Shak._), affected with apoplexy. [Gr.
_apopl[=e]xia_--_apo_, from, away, and _pl[=e]ss-ein_, to strike.]

APOSIOPESIS, a-po-si-o-p[=e]'sis, _n._ a figure by which the speaker
suddenly stops as though unable or unwilling to proceed, e.g. Virgil,
_Æneid_, i. 135, 'Quos ego----' [Gr.;--_apo-si[=o]pa-ein_, to keep silent,
_apo_ and _si[=o]p[=e]_, silence.]

APOSTASY, APOSTACY, a-post'a-si, _n._ abandonment of one's religion,
principles, or party: a revolt from ecclesiastical obedience, from a
religious profession, or from holy orders.--_n._ APOST'ATE, one guilty of
apostasy: a renegade from his faith from unworthy motives.--_adj._ false:
traitorous: fallen.--_adjs._ APOSTAT'IC, -AL.--_v.i._ APOST'ATISE. [Gr. 'a
standing away;' _apo_, from, _stasis_, a standing.]

A POSTERIORI, [=a] pos-t[=e]-ri-[=o]'ri, _adj._ applied to reasoning from
experience, from effect to cause, as opposed to _a priori_ reasoning, from
cause to effect: empirical: gained from experience. _Synthetic_ and
_analytic_, _deductive_ and _inductive_, correspond in a general way to _a
priori_ and _a posteriori_. [L. _a_ = _ab_, from, _posteriori_, abl. of
_posterior_, comp. of _posterus_, after.]

APOSTIL, -ILLE, a-pos'til, _n._ a marginal note. [Fr. _apostille_. See
POSTIL.]

APOSTLE, a-pos'l, _n._ one sent to preach the gospel: specially, one of the
twelve disciples of Christ: the founder of the Christian Church in a
country, e.g. Augustine, the apostle of the English; Columba, of the Scots;
Boniface, of Germany, &c.: the principal champion or supporter of a new
system, or of some cause: the highest in the fourfold ministry of the
Catholic and Apostolic Church: one of the twelve officials forming a
presiding high council in the Mormon Church.--_ns._ APOS'TLESHIP, the
office or dignity of an apostle; APOST'OLATE, the office of an apostle:
leadership in a propaganda.--_adjs._ APOSTOL'IC, -AL.--_ns._ APOSTOL'ICISM,
profession of apostolicity; APOSTOLIC'ITY, the quality of being
apostolic--APOSTLES' CREED, the oldest form of Christian creed that exists,
early ascribed to the apostles, and indeed substantially, if not strictly,
apostolic; APOSTLE SPOONS, silver spoons with handles ending in figures of
the apostles, a common baptismal present in the 16th and 17th centuries;
APOSTLES, TEACHING OF THE TWELVE--often called merely the _Didach[=e]_ (Gr.
'teaching')--the title of a treatise discovered in 1883 on Christian
doctrine and government, closely connected with the last two books
(vii.-viii.) of the _Apostolic Constitutions_.--APOSTOLIC CONSTITUTIONS and
CANONS, notes of ecclesiastical customs held to be apostolical, written in
the form of apostolic precepts, and erroneously ascribed by tradition to
Clement of Rome; APOSTOLIC FATHERS, the immediate disciples and
fellow-labourers of the apostles, more especially those who have left
writings behind them (Barnabas, Clement of Rome, Ignatius, Hermas,
Polycarp); APOSTOLIC SEE, the see of Rome; APOSTOLIC VICAR, the cardinal
representing the Pope in extraordinary missions.--APOSTOLICAL SUCCESSION,
the derivation of holy orders by an assumed unbroken chain of transmission
from the apostles through their natural successors, the bishops--the theory
of the Catholic Church: the assumption that a ministry so ordained enjoy
the succession of apostolic powers and privileges. [Gr.; one sent away,
_apo_, away, _stell-ein_, to send.]

APOSTROPHE, a-pos'trof-e, _n._ (_rhet._) a sudden turning away from the
ordinary course of a speech to address some person or object present or
absent, explained by Quintilian as addressed to a person present, but
extended by modern use to the absent or dead: a mark (') showing the
omission of a letter or letters in a word, also a sign of the modern Eng.
genitive or possessive case--orig. a mere mark of the dropping of the
letter _e_ in writing.--_adj._ APOSTROPH'IC.--_v.t._ APOS'TROPHISE, to
address by apostrophe. [Gr. _apo_, from, and STROPHE, a turning.]

APOTHECARY, a-poth'ek-ar-i, _n._ one who prepares and sells drugs for
medicinal purposes--a term long since substituted by _druggist_, although
still a legal description for licentiates of the Apothecaries' Society of
London, or of the Apothecaries' Hall of Ireland. [Through Fr. and L. from
Gr. _apoth[=e]k[=e]_, a storehouse--_apo_, away, and _tithe-nai_, to
place.]

APOTHECIUM, ap-[=o]-th[=e]'si-um, _n._ the spore-case in lichens. [Gr.
_apoth[=e]k[=e]_, a storehouse. See APOTHECARY.]

APOTHEGM. See APOPHTHEGM.

APOTHEOSIS, a-po-th[=e]'o-sis, or a-po-the-[=o]'sis, _n._ deification, esp.
the formal attribution of divine honours to a deceased Roman emperor, or
special object of the imperial favour--a logical corollary to the worship
of ancestors, degenerating naturally by anticipation into the adoration of
the living: the glorification of a principle or person: ascension to glory,
release from earthly life: resurrection.--_v.i._ APOTH[=E]'OSISE,
APOTH'EOSISE. [Gr.; _apotheo-ein_, _apo_, away from what he was, _theos_, a
god.]

APOZEM, a'po-zem, _n._ a decoction or infusion. [Gr. _apozema_--_apo_, off,
and _ze-ein_, to boil.]

APPAL, ap-pawl', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to wax faint, fail, decay.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ (_obs._) to dim, weaken: to terrify, dismay:--_pr.p._ appal'ling;
_pa.p._ appalled'.--_p.adj._ APPAL'LING, shocking.--_adv._ APPAL'LINGLY.
[Perh. from O. Fr. _apalir_, _apallir_, to wax pale, also to make pale. See
PALL and PALE.]

APPANAGE, APANAGE, ap'pan-[=a]j, _n._ the assignation or conveyance by the
crown of lands and feudal rights to the princes of the royal family, a
provision for younger sons, a dependency: any perquisite: an adjunct or
attribute.--_p.adj._ AP'PANAGED, endowed with an appanage. [Fr.
_apanage_--L. _ad_, and _pan-is_, bread.]

APPARATUS, ap-par-[=a]'tus, _n._ things prepared or provided, material: set
of instruments, tools, natural organs, &c.: materials for the critical
study of a document. [L.; _ad_, to, _par[=a]tus_ (_par[=a]re_), prepared.]

APPAREL, ap-par'el, _n._ covering for the body, dress: aspect, guise:
(_arch._) the rigging of a ship.--_v.t._ to dress, adorn:--_pr.p._
appar'elling or appar'eling; _pa.p._ appar'elled or appar'eled.--_ns._
APPAR'ELLING, APPAR'ELING. [O. Fr. _apareiller_, through obscure Low L.
forms from L. _par_, equal, like.]

APPARENT, ap-p[=a]r'ent, _adj._ that may be seen: evident: palpable:
seeming, as opposed to what really is: (_Shak._) by ellipsis for
heir-apparent.--_adv._ APPAR'ENTLY.--_ns._ APPAR'ENTNESS; HEIR'-APPAR'ENT,
applied to one who will undoubtedly inherit if he survives the present
possessor. [Through Fr. from L. _apparent-em_, _appar[=e]-re_.]

APPARITION, ap-par-ish'un, _n._ an appearance--of a visitor, a comet, the
appearance in history: an immaterial appearance--of a spirit of the
departed, as of a real being, a ghost: (_astron._) the first appearance of
a celestial body after occultation.--_adj._ APPARI'TIONAL. [See APPEAR.]

APPARITOR, ap-par'it-or, _n._ an officer who attends on a court, or on a
magistrate, to execute orders: still applied to the officer of an
archiepiscopal, episcopal, archidiaconal, or other ecclesiastical court,
sometimes to the beadle of a university bearing the mace: (_rare_) one who
appears. [L. See APPEAR.]

APPAY, ap-p[=a]', _v.t._ See APAY.

APPEACH, ap-p[=e]ch', _v.t._ (_obs._) to accuse, censure, or impeach.--_n._
APPEACH'MENT. [O. Fr. _empechier_--L. _impedic[=a]re_, to catch by the
feet--_in_, in, and _pedica_, a fetter. See IMPEACH.]

APPEAL, ap-p[=e]l', _v.i._ to call upon, have recourse to (with _to_): to
refer (to a witness or superior authority): make supplication or earnest
request to a person for a thing: to resort for verification or proof to
some principle or person.--_v.t._ to remove a cause (to another
court).--_n._ act of appealing: a supplication: removal of a cause to a
higher tribunal.--_adjs._ APPEAL'ABLE; APPEAL'ING, relating to
appeals.--_adv._ APPEAL'INGLY.--_n._ APPEAL'INGNESS. [O. Fr.
_apeler_--_appell[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to address, call by name; also to
appeal to, impeach.]

APPEAR, ap-p[=e]r', _v.i._ to become visible: to present one's self
formally before an authority or tribunal, hence to act as the
representative or counsel for another: to be manifest: to be in one's
opinion, to seem: to come into view, to come before the public, to be
published (of a book): to seem though not real.--_ns._ APPEAR'ANCE, the act
of appearing, e.g. in court to prosecute or answer a charge: the
publication of a book: the effect of appearing conspicuously, show, parade:
the condition of that which appears, form, aspect: outward look or show: a
natural phenomenon: an apparition; APPEAR'ER, one that appears: one who
puts in an appearance in court.--IT APPEARS (_impers._).--TO ALL
APPEARANCE, so far as appears to any one; TO KEEP UP APPEARANCES, to keep
up an outward show with intent to conceal the absence of the inward
reality; TO PUT IN AN APPEARANCE, to appear in person. [Through Fr. from L.
_appar[=e]-re_--_ad_, to, _par[=e]re_, _paritum_, to come forth.]

APPEASE, ap-p[=e]z', _v.t._ to pacify: propitiate one who is angry: to
quiet: to allay: to pacify by granting demands.--_adj._ APPEAS'ABLE.--_n._
APPEASE'MENT, the action of appeasing: the state of being appeased.--_adv._
APPEAS'INGLY. [O. Fr. _apese-r_, to bring to peace--L. _pac-em_, peace.]

APPELLANT, ap-pel'ant, _n._ one who makes an appeal from the decision of a
lower court to a higher: one who makes earnest entreaty of any kind:
(_obs._) one who challenges another to single combat: one of the clergy in
the Jansenist controversy who rejected the bull Unigenitus issued in 1713,
appealing to a pope 'better informed,' or to a general council.--_adj._
APPELL'ATE, relating to appeals. [See APPEAL.]

APPELLATION, ap-pel-[=a]'shun, _n._ that by which anything is called: a
name, especially one attached to a particular person.--_adj._
APPELL[=A]'TIONAL.--_n._ APPELL'ATIVE, a name common to all of the same
kind, as distinguished from a proper name: a designation.--_adj._ common to
many: general: of or pertaining to the giving of names.--_adv._
APPELL'ATIVELY. [See APPEAL.]

APPEND, ap-pend', _v.t._ to hang one thing to another: to add.--_n._
APPEND'AGE, something appended.--_adj._ APPEND'ANT, attached, annexed,
consequent.--_n._ an adjunct, quality.--_n._ APPENDIC[=I]'TIS, inflammation
of the vermiform appendix of the cæcum.--_adj._ APPENDIC'ULAR, of the
nature of or belonging to an appendix.--_n._ APPENDICUL[=A]'RIA, a genus of
Ascidians whose members retain the larval vertebrate characters which are
lost in the more or less degenerate sea-squirts.--_adj._ APPENDIC'ULATE,
furnished with appendages.--_n._ APPEND'IX, something appended or added: a
supplement: an addition to a book or document, containing matter
explanatory, but not essential to its completeness: (_anat._) a process,
prolongation, or projection:--_pl._ APPEND'IXES, APPEND'ICES.--APPENDIX
AURICULÆ, the appendix of the auricle of the heart; APPENDICES EPIPLOICÆ,
saccular processes, containing fat attached to the serous covering of the
large intestine; APPENDIX VERMIFORMIS, or VERMIFORM APPENDIX, a blind
process terminating the cæcum in man. [L. _ad_, to, _pend[)e]re_, to hang.]

APPENTICE, a-pen'tis, _n._ (_archit._) a pent-house.

APPERCEPTION, ap-er-sep'shun, _n._ the mind's perception of itself as a
conscious agent: an act of voluntary consciousness, accompanied with
self-consciousness.

APPERIL, a-per'il, _n._ (_Shak._) peril. [L. _ad_, and PERIL.]

APPERTAIN, ap-p[.e]r-t[=a]n', _v.i._ to belong to, as a possession, a
right, or attribute.--_n._ APPER'TAINANCE.--_p.adj._ APPERTAIN'ING, proper,
appropriate (with _to_).--_n._ APPERTAIN'MENT (_Shak._), that which
appertains to any rank or dignity.--_adj._ APPER'TINENT, pertaining or
belonging to.--_n._ (_Shak._) that which pertains to anything else.
[Through Fr. from L. _ad_, to, _pertin[=e]-re_, to belong. See PERTAIN.]

APPETENCY, ap'pet-ens-i, _n._ a seeking after: craving or appetite: desire,
especially sensual desire--also AP'PETENCE.--_adj._ AP'PETENT. [L.
_appetent-em_, _appet[)e]re_--_ad_, to, _pet[)e]re_, to seek.]

APPETITE, ap'pet-[=i]t, _n._ physical craving, accompanied with uneasy
sensation (hunger, thirst, sex): natural desire: inclination: desire for
food: hunger (with _for_).--_adjs._ AP'PETIBLE, AP'PETITIVE.--_v.t._
AP'PETISE, to create or whet appetite.--_ns._ APPETISE'MENT; APPETIS'ER,
something which whets the appetite.--_p.adj._ APPETIS'ING.--_adv._
APPETIS'INGLY. [Through Fr., from L. _appetitus_, _appet[)e]re_.]

APPLAUD, ap-plawd', _v.t._ to praise by clapping the hands: to praise
loudly: to express loudly approval of anything: to extol.--_n._
APPLAUD'ER.--_p.adj._ APPLAUD'ING.--_adv._ APPLAUD'INGLY.--_n._ APPLAUSE',
praise loudly expressed: acclamation.--_adj._ APPLAUS'IVE.--_adv._
APPLAUS'IVELY. [L. _applaud-[)e]re_--_ad_, to, _plaud[)e]re_, _plausum_, to
clap. See EXPLODE.]

APPLE, ap'l, _n._ the fruit of the apple-tree.--_ns._ AP'PLE-BLIGHT, the
rotting substances found on apple-trees, caused by the APPLE-APHIS (see
APHIS); AP'PLE-JOHN (_Shak._) a variety of apple considered to be in
perfection when shrivelled and withered--also JOHN'-AP'PLE; AP'PLE-PIE, a
pie made with apples; AP'PLE-WIFE, AP'PLE-WOM'AN, a woman who sells apples
at a stall.--APPLE OF DISCORD, any cause of envy and contention, from the
golden apple inscribed 'for the fairest,' thrown by Eris, goddess of
discord, into the assembly of the gods, and claimed by Aphrodite (Venus),
Pallas (Minerva), and Hera (Juno). The dispute being referred to Paris of
Troy, he decided in favour of Aphrodite, to the undying and fatal wrath of
Hera against his city; APPLE OF SODOM, or Dead Sea fruit, described by
Josephus as fair to look upon, but turning, when touched, into ashes: any
fair but disappointing thing; APPLE OF THE EYE, the eyeball: something
especially dear; APPLE-PIE ORDER, complete order. [A.S. _æppel_; cf. Ger.
_apfel_, Ice. _epli_, Ir. _abhal_, W. _afal_.]

APPLIQUÉ, ap'lik-[=a], _n._ work applied to, or laid on, another material,
either of metal-work or of lace or the like. [Pa.p. of Fr. _appliquer_.]

APPLY, ap-pl[=i]', _v.t._ to lay or put to: to administer a remedy: to
bring a general law to bear on particular circumstances: (_obs._) to
ascribe: to employ: to fix the mind on: to bring (a ship) to land.--_v.i._
to suit or agree: to have recourse to: to make request: (_Milton_) to
assign or impute blame to:--_pr.p._ apply'ing; _pa.p._ appl[=i]ed'.--_adj._
APPL[=I]'ABLE, that may be applied: compliant, well disposed.--_ns._
APPL[=I]'ABLENESS; APPL[=I]'ANCE, anything applied: means used: (_Shak._)
compliance.--_ns._ APPLICABIL'ITY, AP'PLICABLENESS.--_adj._ AP'PLICABLE,
that may be applied: suitable.--_adv._ AP'PLICABLY.--_n._ AP'PLICANT, one
who applies: a petitioner.--_adj._ AP'PLICATE, put to practical use,
applied.--_n._ APPLIC[=A]'TION, the act of applying, e.g. the
administration of a remedy: diligence: employment, use of anything in
special regard to something else, as in the 'application' of a story to
real life, the lesson or moral of a fable: close thought or attention:
request: a kind of needlework, appliqué: (_obs._) compliance.--_adj._
AP'PLICATIVE, put into actual use in regard to anything: practical.--_adj._
and _n._ AP'PLICATORY, having the property of applying. [O. Fr.
_aplier_--L. _applic[=a]re_, _[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _plic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_,
to fold.]

APPOGGIATURA, ap-pod-ja-t[=u]'ra, _n._ an Italian musical term, designating
a form of embellishment by insertion of notes of passage in a melody. [It.
_appoggiare_, to lean upon. See APPUI.]

APPOINT, ap-point', _v.t._ to fix: to settle: assign, grant: to name to an
office: to destine, devote: to equip (_obs._ except in _pa.p._.).--_p.adj._
APPOINT'ED, established: furnished.--_n._ APPOINT'MENT, settlement:
engagement: direction: situation: arrangement: (_obs._) allowance paid to a
public officer: (_pl._) equipments. [O. Fr. _apointer_, Low L.
_appunctare_--L. _ad_, to, _punctum_, a point. See POINT.]

APPORTION, ap-p[=o]r'shun, _v.t._ to portion out: to divide in just shares:
to adjust in due proportion.--_n._ APPOR'TIONMENT. [L. _ad_, to, and
PORTION.]

APPOSE, a'p[=o]z, _v.t._ to apply one thing to another, e.g. a seal to a
document: to place side by side. [Formed from L. _appon[)e]re_,
_-positum_.]

APPOS[=I]TE, ap'poz-[=i]t, _adj._ adapted: suitable.--_adv._
AP'POSITELY.--_n._ AP'POSITENESS. [L. _appositus_, pa.p. of _appon[)e]re_,
to put to--_ad_, to, _pon[)e]re_, to put.]

APPOSITION, ap-poz-ish'un, _n._ the act of adding: state of being placed
together or against: juxtaposition: (_gram._) the annexing of one noun to
another, in the same case or relation, in order to explain or limit the
first: also used of a public disputation by scholars, and still the word in
use for the 'Speech Day' at St Paul's School, London.--_adjs._
APPOSI'TIONAL; APPOS'ITIVE, placed in apposition. [See APPOSITE.]

APPRAISE, ap-pr[=a]z', _v.t._ to set a price on: to value with a view to
sale: to estimate the amount and quality of anything.--_adj._
APPRAIS'ABLE.--_ns._ APPRAIS'AL, appraisement; APPRAISE'MENT, a valuation:
estimation of quality; APPRAIS'ER, one who values property: one who
estimates quality. [Late in appearing; for some time used in the same sense
as _praise_. Perh. formed on analogy of the synonymous PRIZE, APPRIZE.]

APPRECIATE, ap-pr[=e]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to estimate justly, to be fully
sensible of all the good qualities in the thing judged: to estimate highly:
to raise in value, to advance the quotation or price of, as opposed to
_depreciate_.--_v.i._ to rise in value.--_adj._ APPR[=E]'CIABLE.--_adv._
APPR[=E]'CIABLY.--_n._ APPRECI[=A]'TION, the act of setting a value on,
also specially of a work of literature or art: just--and also
favourable--estimation: rise in exchangeable value: increase in
value.--_adjs._ APPR[=E]'CIATIVE, APPR[=E]'CIATORY, implying
appreciation.--_n._ APPRECI[=A]'TOR, one who appreciates, or estimates
justly. [L. _appreti[=a]tus_, pa.p. of _appreti[=a]re_--_ad_, to, and
_pretium_, price.]

APPREHEND, ap-pre-hend', _v.t._ to lay hold of: to seize by authority: to
be conscious of by means of the senses: to lay hold of by the intellect: to
catch the meaning of: to consider or hold a thing as such: to fear.--_n._
APPREHENSIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ APPREHENS'IBLE.--_n._ APPREHEN'SION, act of
apprehending or seizing: arrest: (_arch._) conscious perception:
conception: ability to understand: fear: (_obs._) sensitiveness,
sensibility to.--_adj._ APPREHENS'IVE, pertaining to the laying hold of
sensuous and mental impressions: intelligent, clever: having an
apprehension or notion of: fearful: anticipative of something
adverse.--_n._ APPREHENS'IVENESS. [L. _apprehend[)e]re_--_ad_, to,
_prehend[)e]re_, _-hensum_, to lay hold of.]

APPRENTICE, ap-prent'is, _n._ one bound to another to learn a trade or art:
one learning the rudiments of anything, a novice.--_v.t._ to bind as an
apprentice.--_ns._ APPRENT'ICEHOOD (_Shak._), apprenticeship;
APPRENT'ICESHIP, the state of an apprentice: a term of practical training:
specially, a period of seven years.--TO SERVE APPRENTICESHIP, to undergo
the training of an apprentice. [O. Fr. _aprentis_, _aprendre_, to learn--L.
_apprehend[)e]re_. See APPREHEND.]

APPRISE, ap-pr[=i]z', _v.t._ to give notice: to inform. [Fr. _apprendre_,
pa.p. _appris_--L. _adprend[)e]re_. See APPREHEND.]

APPRIZE, -ISE, a-pr[=i]z', _v.t._ (_Scots law_) to put a selling price on:
to value, appreciate.--_n._ APPRIZ'ER, a creditor for whom an appraisal is
made. [O. Fr. _apriser_--_à_, to, and _prisier_, to price, prize. See
APPRAISE, PRAISE, and PRIZE.]

APPROACH, ap-pr[=o]ch', _v.i._ to draw near: to draw nigh (of time or
events): to come near in quality, condition, &c.: (_arch._) to come into
personal relations with a person.--_v.t._ to come near to: to resemble:
attain to: to bring near in any sense.--_n._ a drawing near to in military
attack, in personal relations: access: a path or avenue: approximation:
(_pl._) trenches, &c., by which besiegers strive to reach a fortress.--_n._
APPROACHABI'LTY.--_adj._ APPROACH'ABLE. [O. Fr. _aprochier_, Low L.
_adpropiare_--L. _ad_, to, _prope_, near.]

APPROBATION, ap-prob-[=a]'shun, _n._ formal sanction: approval: (_Shak._)
confirmation.--_v.t._ AP'PROBATE, to approve authoritatively (_obs._ except
in U.S.): (_Scots law_) to approve of as valid.--_adjs._ AP'PROBATORY,
AP'PROBATIVE, of or belonging to one who approves.--TO APPROBATE AND
REPROBATE, a phrase in Scotch law which means that no one can be permitted
to accept and reject the same deed or instrument, analogous in the law of
England to Election. [See APPROVE.]

APPROOF, ap-pr[=oo]f', _n._ trial, proof: sanction, approbation.

APPROPINQUATE, ap-pro-pink'w[=a]t, _v.i._ to come near to.--_ns._
APPROPINQU[=A]'TION, APPROPIN'QUITY. [L. _appropinqu[=a]re_, to
approach--_ad_, to, and _propinquus_, near (_prope_).]

APPROPRIATE, ap-pr[=o]'pri-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make the private property of
any one: to take to one's self as one's own: to set apart for a purpose:
(_arch._) to select as suitable (with _to_).--_adj._ set apart for a
particular purpose: peculiar: suitable.--_adv._ APPROPRIATELY.--_ns._
APPR[=O]'PRIATENESS; APPROPRI[=A]'TION, the act of appropriating: in Church
law, the making over of a benefice to an owner who receives the tithes, but
is bound to appoint a vicar for the spiritual service of the parish: in
Constitutional law, the principle, that supplies granted by parliament are
only to be expended for particular objects specified by itself.--_adj._
APPR[=O]'PRIATIVE.--_ns._ APPR[=O]'PRIATIVENESS; APPR[=O]'PRIATOR, one who
appropriates.--APPROPRIATION CLAUSE, a clause in a parliamentary bill,
allotting revenue to any special purpose or purposes. [L. _appropri[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _proprius_, one's own. See PROPER.]

APPROVE, a-pr[=oo]v', _v.t._ to show, demonstrate (also reflexively): to
sanction or ratify: to think well of, to be pleased with, to commend:
(_Shak._) to put to the trial, hence also, to convict upon proof.--_v.i._
to judge favourably, to be pleased (with _of_).--_adj._ APPROV'ABLE,
deserving approval--_ns._ APPROV'AL, the act of approving: approbation;
APPROV'ER, one who approves: (_law_) an accomplice in crime admitted to
give evidence against a prisoner.--_adv._ APPROV'INGLY. [O. Fr.
_aprover_--L. _approb[=a]re_--_ad_, to, and _prob[=a]re_, to test or
try--_probus_, good.]

APPROVE, a-pr[=oo]v', _v.t._ (_law_) to turn to one's profit, increase the
value of. [Confused with APPROVE, but from O. Fr. _aproer_,
_approuer_--_à_, to (L. _ad_), and _pro_, _prou_, advantage. See PROW-ESS.]

APPROVEN, ap-pr[=oo]v'n, old _pa.p._ of APPROVE.

APPROXIMATE, ap-proks'im-[=a]t, _adj._ nearest or next: approaching
correctness.--_v.t._ to bring near.--_v.i._ to come near, to
approach.--_adv._ APPROX'IMATELY.--_n._ APPROXIM[=A]'TION, an approach: a
result in mathematics not rigorously exact, but so near the truth as to be
sufficient for a given purpose.--_adj._ APPROX'IMATIVE, approaching
closely. [L. _approxim[=a]re_, _-atum_--_ad_, to, _proximus_, nearest,
superl. of _prope_, near.]

APPUI, ap-w[=e]', _n._ the reciprocal action between the mouth of the horse
and the rider's hand.--_vs.t._ APPUI, APPUY, to support, e.g. to post
troops in order to support.--POINT D'APPUI, a point at which troops form as
a base of operations. [O. Fr. _apuyer_--Low L. _appodia-re_--L. _ad_, to,
and _podium_, support (Fr. _puy_, a hill).]

APPULSE, ap-puls', _n._ a striking against: the approach of a planet to a
conjunction with the sun or a star.--_n._ APPUL'SION.--_adj._ APPUL'SIVE.
[L. _appuls-us_--_appell-[)e]re_, _ad_, towards, _pell-[)e]re_, to drive.]

APPURTENANCE, ap-pur'ten-ans, _n._ that which appertains to: an appendage
or accessory: (_law_) a right belonging to a property.--_adj._ and _n._
APPUR'TENANT. [O. Fr. _apurtenance_. See APPERTAIN.]

APRICATE, ap'ri-k[=a]t, _v.i._ to bask in the sun.--_v.t._ (_rare_) to
expose to sunlight.--_n._ APRIC[=A]'TION. [L. _appricat-_, _apric[=a]ri_,
to bask in the sun, _apricus_, open to the sun.]

APRICOT, [=a]'pri-kot, _n._ a fruit of the plum kind, roundish, pubescent,
orange-coloured, of a rich aromatic flavour--older form A'PRICOCK. [Port.
_albricoque_ (Fr. _abricot_)--Ar. _al-birquq_. But _b[=i]rquq_ is a corr.
of Late Gr. _praikokion_, which is simply the L. _præcoquum_ or _præcox_,
early ripe; the form is perh. due to a fancied connection with L.
_apricus_, sunny. See PRECOCIOUS.]

APRIL, [=a]'pril, _n._ the fourth month of the year.--_n._ A'PRIL-FOOL, one
sent upon a bootless errand on the 1st of April, perhaps a relic of some
old Celtic heathen festival. In Scotland called _gowk_ (a cuckoo, a fool).
[L. _Aprilis_, usually regarded as from _aperire_, as the month when the
earth opens to bring forth new fruits.]

A PRIORI, [=a] pri-[=o]'r[=i], a term applied to reasoning from what is
prior, logically or chronologically, e.g. reasoning from cause to effect;
from a general principle to its consequences; even from observed fact to
another fact or principle not observed, or to arguing from pre-existing
knowledge, or even cherished prejudices; (_Kant_) from the forms of
cognition independent of experience.--_ns._ APRI[=O]'RISM, APRI[=O]'RITY;
APRI[=O]'RIST, one who believes in Kant's view of a priori cognition. [L.
_a_, _ab_, from, _priori_, abl. of _prior_, preceding.]

APRON, [=a]'prun, _n._ a cloth or piece of leather worn before one to
protect the dress, or as part of a distinctive official dress, as by
Freemasons, &c.--aprons of silk or the like are often worn by ladies for
mere ornament: the short cassock ordinarily worn by English bishops:
anything resembling an apron in shape or use, as a gig-apron, &c.--_v.t._
to cover with, as with an apron.--_adj._ A'PRONED.--_ns._ A'PRON-MAN
(_Shak._), a man who wears an apron, a mechanic; A'PRON-STRING, a string by
which an apron is attached to the person.--TO BE TIED TO A WOMAN'S
APRON-STRINGS, to be bound to a woman as a child is bound to its mother.
[O. Fr. _naperon_--_nappe_, cloth, tablecloth--L. _mappa_, a napkin.]

APROPOS, a-pro-p[=o]', _adv._ to the purpose: appropriately: in reference
to (with _to_ and _of_).--_adj._ opportune. [Fr. _à propos_. See PROPOSE.]

APSE, aps, _n._ an arched semicircular or polygonal recess at the east end
of the choir of a church--here, in the Roman basilica, stood the prætor's
chair.--_adj._ AP'SIDAL.--_n._ APSID'IOLE, a secondary apse, as one of the
apses on either side of the central or main apse in a church of triapsidal
plan. [See APSIS.]

APSIS, ap'sis, _n._ one of the two extreme points in the orbit of a planet,
one at the greatest, the other at the least distance from the sun: one of
the two points in the orbit of a satellite--one nearest to, the other
farthest from, its primary; corresponding, in the case of the moon, to the
perigee and apogee:--_pl._ APSIDES (ap'si-d[=e]z).--_adj._ AP'SIDAL. [L.
_apsis_--Gr. _hapsis_, a connection, an arch--_hapt-ein_, to connect. See
APT.]

APT, apt, _adj._ liable: ready for or prone to anything: prompt, open to
impressions (with _at_).--_adv._ APT'LY.--_n._ APT'NESS. [L. _apt-us_, fit,
suitable, apposite; cog. with Gr. _hapt-ein_.]

APTEROUS, ap't[.e]r-us, _adj._ without wings.--_adj._ AP'TERAL, without
wings: (_archit._) without lateral columns. [Gr. _a_, neg., _pteron_, a
wing.]

APTERYX, ap't[.e]r-iks, _n._ a bird found in New Zealand, wingless and
tailless, reddish-brown, about the size of a large hen. [Gr. _a_, neg.,
_pteryx_, wing.]

APTITUDE, apt'i-t[=u]d, _n._ fitness: tendency: readiness, teachableness,
talent (with _for_). [Low L. _aptitudo_--L. _apt-us_.]

APTOTE, ap't[=o]t, _n._ a noun without any variation of cases. [Gr.
_apt[=o]tos_--_a_, priv., _pt[=o]sis_, a falling, a case--_pipt-ein_, to
fall.]

APYRETIC, a-pir-et'ik, _adj._ without pyrexia or fever, especially of those
days in which the intermission of fevers occurs in agues--_n._ APYREX'IA.
[Gr. _a_, neg., and _pyretos_, fever.]

AQUA-FORTIS, [=a]'kwa-for'tis, _n._ nitric acid, a powerful solvent, hence
used figuratively.--_ns._ AQUAFORT'IST, one who prepares etchings or
engravings by means of aqua-fortis; A'QUA-MIRAB'ILIS, a preparation
distilled from cloves, nutmeg, ginger, and spirit of wine; A'QUA-R[=E]'GIA,
a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acids, so called because it dissolves
the royal metal, gold; A'QUA TOFA'NA, a poisonous fluid (prepared from
arsenic) made in Palermo in the 17th cent. by a woman _Tofana_;
A'QUA-VI'TÆ, an old name for alcohol, used of brandy, whisky, &c.; cf. Fr.
_eau de vie_, and _usquebaugh_. [L. _aqua_, water, _fortis_, strong.]

AQUAMARINE, [=a]'kwa-ma-r[=e]n', _n._ the beryl.--_adj._ bluish-green,
sea-coloured. [L. _aqua_, water, _mar[=i]na_--_mare_, the sea.]

AQUARELLE, ak-wa-rel', _n._ water-colour painting, or a painting in
water-colours.--_n._ AQUAREL'LIST. [Fr.,--It. _acquerella_, _acqua_--L.
_aqua_.]

AQUARIUM, a-kw[=a]'ri-um, _n._ a tank or series of tanks for keeping
aquatic animals, usually made mostly of glass, filled with either fresh or
salt water, having rocks, plants, &c. as in nature: an artificial pond or
cistern for cultivating water-plants:--_pl._ AQU[=A]'RIUMS, AQU[=A]'RIA.
[L.--_aqua_, water.]

AQUARIUS, a-kw[=a]'ri-us, _n._ the water-bearer, the eleventh sign of the
zodiac, which the sun enters about 21st January, so called from the
constellation of the same name, supposed to represent a man holding his
left hand upward, and pouring with his right water from a vase into the
mouth of the Southern Fish. [L.--_aqua_, water.]

AQUATIC, a-kwat'ik, _adj._ relating to water: living or growing in
water.--_n.pl._ AQUAT'ICS, amusements on the water, as boating, &c.

AQUATINT, [=a]'kwa-tint, _n._ a mode of etching on copper, by which
imitations are produced of drawings in Indian ink, &c.--also
AQUATINT'A.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ A'QUATINT, to engrave in aquatint. [It.
_acqua tinta_--L. _aqua_, water, and _ting[)e]re_, _tinctum_, to wet, to
colour.]

AQUEDUCT, ak'we-dukt, _n._ an artificial channel for conveying water, most
commonly understood to mean a bridge of stone, iron, or wood for conveying
water across a valley: also a bridge carrying a canal for the purposes of
navigation. [L. _aqua_, water--_duc[)e]re_, _ductum_, to lead.]

AQUEOUS, [=a]'kwe-us, _adj._ watery: deposited by water.--_adv._
A'QUEOUSLY.--AQUEOUS HUMOUR, the watery fluid which fills the space between
the cornea and the crystalline lens in the eye; AQUEOUS ROCKS, in geology,
rocks composed of matter deposited by water.

AQUIFEROUS, ak-wif'[.e]r-us, _adj._ bearing water. [L. _aqua_, water,
_fero_, I bear.]

AQUIFORM, [=a]'kwi-form, _adj._ having the form of water. [L. _aqua_,
water, and FORM.]

AQUILINE, ak'wil-in, or -[=i]n, _adj._ relating to or like the eagle:
curved or hooked, like an eagle's beak. [L. _aquila_.]

AQUILON, ak'wi-lon, _n._ (_Shak._) the north wind. [L. _aquilo_, _-onis_.]

ARAB, ar'ab, _n._ a native of Arabia: an Arab horse, noted for its
gracefulness and speed: a neglected or homeless boy or girl--usually STREET
or CITY ARAB.--_adj._ of or belonging to Arabia.--_adj._ AR[=A]B'IAN,
relating to Arabia.--_n._ a native of Arabia.--_adj._ AR'ABIC, relating to
Arabia, or to its language.--_n._ the language of Arabia.--_ns._ AR'ABISM,
an Arabic idiom; AR'ABIST, one skilled in the Arabic language or
literature; AR'ABY, a poetical form of _Arabia_. [L. _Arabs_,
_Arab-em_--Gr. _Araps_.]

ARABA, ar-ä'ba, _n._ a heavy screened wagon used by the Tartars.--Also
AR'BA and AR[=O]'BA. [Ar. and Pers. _ar[=a]bah_.]

[Illustration]

ARABESQUE, ar'ab-esk, _adj._ after the manner of Arabian designs.--_n._ a
fantastic painted or sculptured ornament among the Spanish Moors,
consisting of foliage and other parts of plants curiously
intertwined.--_adj._ AR'ABESQUED, so ornamented. [Fr.--It. _arabesco_;
_-esco_ corresponding to Eng. _-ish_.]

ARABINE, ar'ab-in, _n._ the essential principle of gum-arabic.

ARABLE, ar'a-bl, _adj._ fit for ploughing or tillage. [L.
_arabilis_--_ara-re_, cog. with Gr. _aro-ein_, to plough, A.S. _erian_,
Eng. EAR (v.t.), Ir. _araim_.]

ARACHNIDA, a-rak'ni-da, _n.pl._ a sub-class of Tracheate Arthropoda,
embracing spiders, scorpions, mites, &c., first separated by Lamarck from
the Insecta of Linnæus.--_adj._ ARACH'NIDAN.--_n._ and _adj._ ARACH'NOID,
like a cobweb.--_adjs._ ARACHNOI'DAL, ARACHNOLOG'ICAL.--_n._
ARACHNO'LOGIST, one who devotes himself to the study of
arachnida.--ARACHNOID MEMBRANE, one of the three coverings of the brain and
spinal cord, situated between the dura-mater and the pia-mater,
non-vascular, transparent, thin. [Gr. _arachn[=e]_, spider.]

ARAGONITE, ar'a-gon-[=i]t, _n._ a variety of calcium carbonate. [_Aragon_,
in Spain.]

ARAISE, a-r[=a]z', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to raise from the dead. [Pfx. _a-_, and
RAISE.]

ARAMAIC, ar-a-m[=a]'ik, _adj._ relating to _Aramæa_, the whole of the
country to the north-east of Palestine, or to its language--also
ARAM[=E]'AN, AR'AMITE.--_n._ ARAM[=A]'ISM, an Aramaic idiom.

ARANEIFORM, ar-a-n[=e]'i-form, _adj._ in the form of a spider.--_adj._
ARAN[=E]'IDAN.--_n._ ARANEOL'OGIST = ARACHNOL'OGIST.--_adj._ ARAN'EOUS,
like a spider's web. [L. _ar[=a]nea_, spider, and FORM.]

ARAPHOROSTIC, ar-af-or-os'tik, _adj._ (_Lytton_) seamless.--Also
AROPHOS'TIC. [Formed from Gr. _arraphos_, unsewed--_a_, neg., and
_hropt-ein_, to sew.]

ARAUCARIA, ar-aw-k[=a]'ri-a, _n._ a genus of lofty evergreen trees of the
natural order Coniferæ or Pines, natives of S. America and Australasia.
[_Arauco_, name of a province, whence _Araucania_, a district in S. Chili.]

ARBALEST, är'bal-est, _n._ a crossbow of steel or horn used in war and the
chase--also AR'BALIST, AR'BLAST, ARC[=U]'BALIST.--_ns._ AR'BALISTER,
AR'BALESTER, one armed with an arbalest. [O. Fr. _arbaleste_--L.
_arcuballista_--_arcus_, bow, and _ballista_, engine for throwing
missiles.]

ARBITER, är'bit-[.e]r, _n._ one chosen by parties in controversy to decide
between them: a judge having absolute power of decision: an arbitrator:
umpire:--_fem._ AR'BITRESS.--_ns._ AR'BITRAGE, exercise of the functions of
the arbiter; ARBIT'RAMENT, ARBIT'REMENT, the decision of an arbiter:
determination: choice.--_v.i._ AR'BITRATE, to act as an arbiter: to
determine.--_ns._ ARBITR[=A]'TION; AR'BITR[=A]TOR (same as
ARBITER):--_fem._ AR'BITR[=A]TRIX.--ARBITRATION OF EXCHANGE, the
determination of the rate of exchange between two currencies when there are
one or more intermediate places through which the operations must pass.--TO
SUBMIT TO ARBITRATION, to defer a matter of private, public, or
international controversy to the judgment of certain persons selected.
[L.--_ar_ = _ad_, to, and _bit-[)e]re_ (cog. with Gr. _bai-nein_), to go or
come; sig. one who comes to look on, a witness, a judge.]

ARBITRARY, är'bi-trar-i, _adj._ not bound by rules: despotic, absolute,
arising from accident rather than from rule, varying, uncertain.--_adv._
AR'BITRARILY.--_n._ AR'BITRARINESS. [L. _arbitrarius_, arbiter.]

ARBLAST. See ARBALEST.

ARBOR, är'bur, _n._ the Latin word for tree.--_adjs._ ARBOR[=A]'CEOUS,
ARB[=O]R'EAL, of tree-like character.--_n._ ARBOR-DAY, in many of the
United States, a day yearly set apart for the general planting of trees by
school children--in Canada, the first Friday in May.--_adj._ ARB[=O]R'EOUS,
of or belonging to trees.--_ns._ ARBORES'CENCE, ARBORIS[=A]'TION, tree-like
growth.--_adj._ ARBORES'CENT, growing or formed like a tree: (_archit._)
branching like a tree.--_ns._ AR'BORET (_obs._), shrubbery: (_Spens._) a
little tree, shrub; ARBOR[=E]'TUM, a place in which specimens of trees and
shrubs are cultivated:--_pl._ ARBOR[=E]'TA.--_adj._ ARBORICUL'TURAL.--_ns._
AR'BORICULTURE, forestry, the culture of trees, esp. timber-trees;
ARBORICUL'TURIST; AR'BORIST, one who studies trees.--_adj._ AR'BOROUS,
formed by trees.--ARBOR VITÆ, a popular name of several evergreen shrubs of
the genus Thuja. When the human cerebellum is cut vertically, a tree-like
appearance seen receives this name.

ARBOR, är'bur, _n._ the main support of a machine: an axis or spindle on
which a wheel revolves. [L.]

ARBOUR, är'bur, _n._ an enclosed seat in a garden, covered with branches of
trees, plants, &c.: a bower: a shaded walk.--_adj._ AR'BOURED. [See
HARBOUR.]

ARBUTE, är'b[=u]t, _n._ the strawberry-tree: an evergreen shrub, which
bears a scarlet fruit somewhat resembling the strawberry.--Also AR'BUTUS.
[L. _arbutus_, akin to _arbor_, tree.]

ARC, ärk, _n._ a segment of a circle or other curve. [O. Fr.--L. _arcus_, a
bow.]

ARCADE, ärk-[=a]d', _n._ a row of arches supported by columns--the Gothic
counterpart to the classical colonnade: the row of piers, or columns and
arches, by which the aisles are divided from the nave of a church, or by
which cloisters are enclosed: a walk arched over: a long arched gallery
lined with shops on both sides. [Fr.--L. _arcata_, arched. See ARCH.]

ARCADIAN, ark-[=a]d'i-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Arcadia_ (_poet._ AR'CADY),
a district in Greece whose people were primitive in manners and given to
music and dancing: pastoral: simple, innocent.--_n._ ARCAD'IANISM.--_adv._
ARCAD'IANLY.

ARCANUM, ärk-[=a]n'um, _n._ a secret: a mystery: a secret remedy or
elixir:--_pl._ ARCAN'A.--_adj._ ARCANE' (_rare_). [L.--_arcanus_--_arca_, a
chest.]

ARCATURE, ar-ka-t[=u]r, _n._ French for arcade, a small arcade: a blind
arcade for decorating wall spaces.

ARCH, ärch, _n._ a concave construction of stones or other materials, built
or turned on a centering over an open space, so as by mutual pressure to
support each other and sustain a superincumbent weight.--_v.t._ to cover
with an arch: to bend into the form of an arch.--_p.adj._ ARCHED, made with
an arch, or like an arch.--_ns._ ARCH'LET, a little arch; ARCH'WAY, an
arched or vaulted passage, esp. that leading into a castle.--ARCHES, or
COURT OF ARCHES, the ecclesiastical court of appeal for the province of
Canterbury, formerly held at the church of St-Mary-le-Bow (or 'of the
Arches'), from the arches that support its steeple. [O. Fr.,--L. _arca_,
chest.]

ARCH, ärch, _adj._ cunning: waggish: roguish: shrewd, now mostly of women
and children.--_adv._ ARCH'LY.--_n._ ARCH'NESS. [Derived from the prefix
_arch-_, in its use in words like _arch_-rogue, &c.]

ARCH, ärch (ärk in _archangel_), _adj._ used as a prefix, now chiefly as an
intensive in an odious sense: the first or chief.--_ns._ ARCH'-EN'EMY, a
chief enemy: Satan--also ARCH'-FOE; ARCH'-FIEND, the supreme fiend: Satan;
ARCH'-FL[=A]'MEN, a chief flamen or priest; ARCH-HE'RESY; ARCH'-HE'RETIC, a
leader of heresy; ARCH'-MOCK' (_Shak._), the height of mockery;
ARCH'-P[=I]'RATE, a chief pirate; ARCH'-P[=O]'ET, a chief poet: (_obs._) a
poet-laureate; ARCH'-PREL'ATE, a chief prelate; ARCH'-PRIEST', a chief
priest: in early times, a kind of vicar to the bishop--later, a rural dean:
the title given to the superiors appointed by the Pope to govern the
secular priests sent into England from the foreign seminaries during the
period 1598-1621; ARCH'-TRAIT'OR, a chief traitor, sometimes applied esp.
to the devil, or to Judas. [A.S. _arce_, _ærce_, through L. from Gr.
_archi_, cog. with _arch-ein_, to begin.]

ARCHÆOLOGY, ärk-e-ol'oj-i, _n._ a knowledge of ancient art, customs, &c.:
the science which deduces a knowledge of past times from the study of their
existing remains.--_adj._ ARCHÆOLOG'ICAL.--_adv._ ARCHÆOLOG'ICALLY.--_n._
ARCHÆOL'OGIST. [Gr. _archaios_, ancient--_arch[=e]_, beginning, and
_logos_, discourse.]

ARCHÆOPTERYX, [=a]r-k[=e]-op't[.e]r-iks, _n._ the oldest known fossil bird,
found in the Jurassic limestone of Bavaria, having a long bony tail of
twenty vertebræ. [Gr. _archaios_, ancient, _pteryx_, wing.]

ARCHAIC, -AL, ärk-[=a]'ik, -al, _adj._ ancient: obsolete, esp. of
language.--_adj._ ARCHÆAN (ärk-[=e]'an), of or belonging to the earliest
zoological period.--_n._ ARCHÆOG'RAPHY.--_adj._ ARCHÆOZ[=O]'IC. (Gr.
_z[=o][=e]_, life), pertaining to the era of the earliest living beings on
the earth.--_adv._ ARCH[=A]'ICALLY.--_n._ ARCH[=A]'ICISM.--_v.t._
AR'CH[=A]ISE, to imitate the archaic.--_ns._ ARCH[=A]'ISM, an archaic or
obsolete word or phrase; ARCH[=A]'IST (_Mrs Browning_).--_adj._
ARCH[=A]IS'TIC, affectedly or imitatively archaic. [Gr.
_archaikos_--_archaios_, ancient--_arch[=e]_, beginning.]

ARCHANGEL, ärk-[=a]n'jel, _n._ an angel of the highest order.--_adj._
ARCHANGEL'IC. [ARCH, chief, and ANGEL.]

ARCHBISHOP, ärch-bish'up, _n._ a chief bishop: a metropolitan bishop who
superintends the conduct of the suffragan bishops in his province, and also
exercises episcopal authority in his own diocese.--_n._ ARCHBISH'OPRIC.
[ARCH, chief, and BISHOP.]

ARCHDEACON, ärch-d[=e]'kn, _n._ a chief deacon: the ecclesiastical
dignitary having the chief supervision of a diocese or part of it, next
under the bishop--the 'bishop's eye.'--_ns._ ARCHDEAC'ONRY, the office,
jurisdiction, or residence of an archdeacon; ARCHDEAC'ONSHIP, the office of
an archdeacon.--_adj._ ARCHID[=I]AC'ONAL.--_n._ ARCHID[=I]AC'ONATE. [ARCH,
chief, and DEACON.]

ARCHDIOCESE, ärch-d[=i]'o-s[=e]z, _n._ the diocese of an archbishop. [ARCH,
chief, and DIOCESE.]

ARCHDUKE, ärch-d[=u]k', _n._ a duke of specially exalted rank: a prince of
Austria:--_fem._ ARCHDUCH'ESS.--_adj._ ARCHD[=U]'CAL.--_ns._ ARCHDUCH'Y,
ARCHDUKE'DOM, the territory of an archduke or archduchess. [ARCH, chief,
and DUKE.]

ARCHER, ärch'[.e]r, _n._ one who shoots with a bow and arrows:--_fem._
ARCH'ERESS.--_ns._ ARCH'ER-FISH, an acanthopterygious fish of India which
catches insects by shooting water at them from its mouth; ARCH'ERY, the art
of shooting with the bow: a company of archers. [O. Fr. _archier_--L.
_arcari-um_, _arcus_, a bow.]

ARCHETYPE, ärk'e-t[=i]p, _n._ the original pattern or model, a
prototype.--_adj._ ARCHETYP'AL. [Gr. _archetypon_, _archi-_, and _typos_, a
model.]

ARCHIEPISCOPAL, ärk-i-ep-is'kop-al, _adj._ belonging to an
archbishop.--_ns._ ARCHIEPIS'COPACY, ARCHIEPIS'COPATE, dignity or province
of an archbishop. [See EPISCOPAL.]

ARCHIL, är'kil, _n._ a colouring substance obtained from various species of
lichens. [Corrupt form of ORCHIL--O. Fr. _orchel_, _orseil_ (Fr.
_orseille_)--It. _orcello_, origin undetermined.]

ARCHILOCHIAN, är-ki-l[=o]'ki-an, _adj._ pertaining to the Greek lyric poet
_Archilochus_ of Paros (714-676 B.C.), the supposed originator of iambic
metre, noted for the bitterness of his satire--hence the proverbial
phrases, 'Archilochian bitterness' and 'Parian verse:' a _lesser
Archilochian verse_ = a dactylic hexameter alternating with a penthemim; a
_greater Archilochian_, a verse consisting of four dactyls and three
trochees.

ARCHIMAGE, är'ki-m[=a]j, _n._ a chief magician or enchanter. [Gr. _archi-_,
chief, and L. _magus_, a magician.]

ARCHIMANDRITE, är-ki-man'dr[=i]t, _n._ in the Greek Church, the superior of
a monastery, an abbot: sometimes the superintendent of several monasteries.
[Late Gr. _archimandrit[=e]s_--pfx. _archi_, first, and _mandra_, an
enclosure, a monastery.]

[Illustration]

ARCHIMEDEAN, ärk-i-me-d[=e]'an, _adj._ pertaining to _Archimedes_, a
celebrated Greek mathematician of Syracuse (287-212 B.C.).--ARCHIMEDEAN
SCREW, a machine for raising water, in its simplest form consisting of a
flexible tube bent spirally round a solid cylinder, the ends of which are
furnished with pivots, so as to admit of the whole turning round its
axis.--PRINCIPLE OF ARCHIMEDES, a fundamental law in Hydrostatics, that a
body when immersed in a fluid weighs less than it does _in vacuo_ by the
weight of the fluid it displaces.

ARCHIPELAGO, ärk-i-pel'a-g[=o], _n._ the chief sea of the Greeks, or the
Ægean Sea: a sea abounding in small islands, also a group of such
islands:--_pl._ ARCHIPEL'AGOES.--_adj._ ARCHIPELAGIC (-aj'ik). [An Italian
compound from Gr. _archi-_, chief, _pelagos_, sea.]

ARCHITECT, ärk'i-tekt, _n._ a master-builder: one who designs buildings and
superintends their erection: a maker: any contriver, as the
Creator.--_adjs._ ARCHITECTON'IC, pertaining to architecture: constructive:
controlling, having direction: (_metaph._) pertaining to the arrangement of
knowledge.--_n._ the science of architecture: the systematic arrangement of
knowledge.--_adj._ ARCHITECT'URAL.--_n._ ARCHITECT'URE, the art or science
of building: structure: in specific sense, one of the fine arts, the art of
architecture--also used of any distinct style, e.g. Gothic, Byzantine
architecture. [Gr. _architekt[=o]n_--_archi-_, chief, and _tekt[=o]n_, a
builder.]

ARCHITRAVE, ärk'i-tr[=a]v, _n._ (_archit._) the lowest division of the
entablature resting immediately on the abacus of the column: collective
name for the various parts, jambs, lintels, &c. which surround a door or
window.--_p.adj._ ARCH'ITRAVED. [It. from Gr. _archi-_, chief, and L.
_trab-em_, _trabs_, a beam.]

ARCHIVES, ärk'[=i]vz, _n._ the place in which government records are kept:
(_pl._) public records--also figuratively in both senses.--_adj._
ARCH'IVAL, pertaining to, or contained in, archives or records.--_n._
ARCH'IVIST, a keeper of archives or records. [Fr.--Gr. _archeion_,
magisterial residence--_arch[=e]_, government.]

ARCHIVOLT, är'ki-volt, _n._ the band or moulding which runs round the lower
part of the archstones of an arch. [Fr. _archivolte_, It. _archivolto_--L.
_arcus_, an arch, _volta_, a vault.]

ARCHOLOGY, ärk-ol'oj-i, _n._ (_rare_) doctrine of the origin of things: the
science of government. [Gr. _arch[=e]_, beginning, _logos_, discourse.]

ARCHON, ärk'on, _n._ one of nine chief magistrates of ancient
Athens.--_ns._ ARCH'ONSHIP, the office of an archon; ARCH'ONTATE, the
archon's tenure of office. [Gr. _arch-ein_, to be first, to rule.]

ARCHWISE, ärch'w[=i]z, _adv._ in the form of an arch. [ARCH, and WISE,
way.]

ARCTIC, ärk'tik, _adj._ relating to the constellation the Great Bear, or to
the north, used figuratively to express extreme cold.--ARCTIC CIRCLE, a
circle drawn round the North Pole, at a distance of 23½ degrees. [O. Fr.
_artique_--L. _arcticus_--Gr. _arktikos_--_arktos_, a bear.]

ARCTURUS, ärk-t[=u]'rus, _n._ the Bear-ward, a yellow star in the northern
hemisphere, fourth in order of brightness in the entire heavens. [Gr.
_arktouros_--_arktos_, a bear, and _ouros_, ward, guard (from its situation
at the tail of the bear).]

ARCUATE, är'k[=u]-[=a]t, ARCUATED, är'k[=u]-[=a]t-ed, _adj._ bent in the
form of a bow.--_n._ ARCU[=A]'TION. [L. _arcuatus_, pa.p. of _arcu-[=a]re_,
to bend like a bow--_arcus_, a bow.]

ARCUBALIST. See ARBALEST.

ARDEB, är'deb, _n._ an Egyptian dry measure of 5½ bushels. [Ar. _irdab_.]

ARDENT, ärd'ent, _adj._ burning: fiery: passionate: zealous:
fervid.--_adv._ ARD'ENTLY.--_n._ ARD'OUR, warmth of passion or feeling:
eagerness: enthusiasm (with _for_)--also ARD'ENCY.--ARDENT SPIRITS,
distilled alcoholic liquors, whisky, brandy, &c. The use of the word as =
'inflammable, combustible,' is obsolete, except in this phrase. [L.
_ardent-em_, _ard[=e]-re_, to burn.]

ARDUOUS, ärd'[=u]-us, _adj._ deep, difficult to climb: difficult to
accomplish: laborious.--_adv._ ARD'UOUSLY.--_n._ ARD'UOUSNESS. [L.
_arduus_, high; cog. with Celt. _ard_, high.]

ARE, ar, _n._ the unit of the French land measure, containing 100 sq.
metres = 119.6 English sq. yards. [Fr.--L. _area_.]

ARE, är, the plural of the present indicative of the verb _To be_. [Old
Northumbrian _aron_, of Scand. origin. This form ousted the older A.S.
_sind_, _sindon_. Both are cog. with Sans. _s-anti_, Gr. _eis-in_, L.
_sunt_, Ger. _s-ind_.]

AREA, [=a]'r[=e]-a, _n._ any plane surface or enclosed space: the sunken
space around the basement of a building: (_fig._) extent conceived by the
mind: (_geom._) the superficial contents of any figure. [L. _area_.]

AREAD, AREDE, a-r[=e]d', _v.t._ (_obs._) to make known, utter: guess:
interpret, explain: to counsel, advise. [A.S. _arédan_. See READ.]

AREAR, a-r[=e]r', _adv._ in the rear. [A.S. pfx. _a-_, on, to, and REAR.]

ARECA, ar'[=e]-ka, _n._ a genus of palm, one species of which, the
Betel-nut Palm, or Penang Palm (_Areca catechu_), bears nuts with austere
and astringent properties, which are chewed by the Malays with a little
lime in a leaf of the betel-pepper, making the lips and spittle red.

AREFACTION, ar-e-fak'shun, _n._ (_obs._) the action of drying.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ AR'EFY, to dry up, wither. [L. _arefac[)e]re_, to make
dry--_ar[=e]re_, to be dry, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ARENA, a-r[=e]'na, _n._ part of the ancient amphitheatre strewed with sand
for the combats of gladiators and wild beasts: any place of public contest:
a battlefield: place of action of any kind.--_adj._ AREN[=A]'CEOUS, sandy:
dry: (_geol._) applied to rocks composed entirely or largely of grains of
quartz.--_ns._ AREN[=A]'RIA, the sandwort, a genus of low herbs allied to
the chickweeds; AREN[=A]'TION, the application of hot sand to the body as a
remedy. [L. _ar[=e]na_, sand.]

AREOGRAPHY, [=a]-re-[=o]'gra-fi, _n._ description of the physical features
of the planet Mars. [Gr. _Ar[=e]s_, Mars, and _graphein_, to write.]

AREOLA, a-r[=e]'o-la, _n._ a small area: (_bot._) any slightly sunk spot,
on the surface: (_physiol._) the interstice in the tissue of an organised
substance: any circular spot such as that around the human nipple:--_pl._
AR[=E]'OLÆ.--_adj._ AR[=E]'OLATE, divided into small areas.--_n._
AREOL[=A]'TION, division into areolæ. [L. _areola_, a dim. of AREA.]

AREOMETER, ARÆOMETER, [=a]-re-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for
determining specific gravity, called also _Hydrometer_.--_n._ AREOM'ETRY,
the measuring the specific gravity of bodies. [Gr. _araios_, thin, and
METER.]

AREOPAGUS, ar-e-op'ag-us, _n._ Mars' Hill, on which the supreme court of
ancient Athens was held: the court itself: also used of any important
tribunal.--_n._ AREOP'AGITE, a member of the Areopagus.--_adj._
AREOPAGIT'IC, pertaining to the Areopagus.--_n._ a speech on the model of
Isocrates's oration of that name addressed to the Areopagus. [Gr. _Areios
pagos_, hill of Ares, or Mars.]

ARET, ARETTE, a-ret', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to entrust, commit a charge to. [O.
Fr. _arete-r_, _à_-, to, _reter_--L. _reput[=a]re_, to reckon.]

ARÊTE, ar-[=a]t', _n._ a sharp ridge: esp. in French Switzerland, a rocky
edge on a mountain. [Fr.--L. _arista_, an ear of corn, fish-bone, spine.]

AREW, a-r[=oo]', _adv._ (_Spens._) arow, in a row.

ARGAL, ar'gal, _adv._ (_Shak._) corruption of L. _ergo_, therefore: hence
as a noun = a clumsy piece of reasoning.

ARGALI, är'ga-li, _n._ the great wild sheep of Siberia and Central Asia.
[Mongol.]

ARGAND, ar'gand, _n._ applied to a lamp and gas-burner invented by Aimé
_Argand_ (1755-1803).

ARGENT, ärj'ent, _adj._ and _n._ silver, or like silver, silvery-white:
(_her._) the silver or white colour in armorial bearings: (_poet._) esp. in
compounds like _argent_-clear, _argent_-lidded.--_adjs._ ARGENT'AL;
ARGENTIF'EROUS, bearing or containing silver; AR'GENTINE, relating to or
like silver: sounding like silver.--_n._ (_nat. hist._) white metal coated
with silver: a genus of small bony fishes with silvery sides, fished for
the nacre which they contain. [Fr.--L. _argentum_, silver.]

ARGIL, är'jil, _n._ potter's clay: pure clay or alumina.--_adjs._
ARGILL[=A]'CEOUS, of the nature of clay; ARGILLIF'EROUS, bearing or
abounding in clay. [L. _argilla_, Gr. _argilos_, white clay--_arg[=e]s_,
white.]

ARGIVE, ar'j[=i]v, _adj._ belonging to _Argos_: Greek.

ARGOL, är'gol, _n._ a hard crust formed on the sides of wine-vessels, from
which cream of tartar and tartaric acid are obtained--generally of a
reddish tinge. [Prob. conn. with Gr. _argos_, white.]

ARGON, ar'gon, _n._ a constituent element of our atmosphere, discovered in
1894 by Rayleigh and Ramsay.

ARGONAUT, är'go-nawt, _n._ one of those who sailed in the ship _Argo_ in
search of the golden fleece: also (_nat. hist._) a name of the nautilus, a
mollusc of the octopod type.--_adj._ ARGONAUT'IC. [Gr. _Arg[=o]_, and
_naut[=e]s_, a sailor.]

ARGOSY, är'go-si, _n._ a large merchant-vessel richly laden, esp. those of
Ragusa and Venice: also figuratively. [The forms _ragosie_, _rhaguse_, used
equally with _argosie_, _argosey_, &c., point to the derivation from It.
_Ragusea_, a ship belonging to Ragusa, a great medieval port on the
Adriatic, spelt in 16th-cent. English as _Aragouse_, _Arragosa_.]

ARGOT, är'go, or är'got, _n._ slang, originally that of thieves and
vagabonds: cant. [Fr.; of unknown origin.]

ARGUE, ärg'[=u], _v.t._ prove or evince: to prove by argument: to discuss:
(_obs._) to accuse.--_v.i._ to offer reasons: to dispute (with _against_,
_for_, _with_, _about_):--_pr.p._ arg'[=u]ing; _pa.p._ arg'[=u]ed.--_adj._
ARG'[=U]ABLE, capable of being argued.--_n._ ARG'[=U]ER, one who argues: a
reasoner.--TO ARGUE (a person) INTO, or OUT OF, to persuade him into, or
out of, a certain course of action. [O. Fr. _arguer_--L. _argut[=a]re_,
freq. of _argu[)e]re_, to prove.]

ARGUFY, ärg'[=u]-f[=i], _v.i._ to be evidence of something: to be of
importance: to argue, wrangle.--_v.t._ to weary with wrangling. [Illiterate
corr. of ARGUE.]

ARGUMENT, ärg'[=u]-ment, _n._ a statement, or reason based on such, offered
as proof: a series of reasons or a step in such: discussion: subject of a
discourse: summary of the subject-matter of a book: (_obs._) matter of
controversy.--_adjs._ ARGUMENT'ABLE, ARGUMENT'AL.--_n._ ARGUMENT[=A]'TION,
an arguing or reasoning.--_adj._ ARGUMENT'ATIVE.--_adv._
ARGUMENT'ATIVELY.--_n._ ARGUMENT'ATIVENESS. [L. _argumentum_. See ARGUE.]

ARGUMENTUM, ärg-[=u]-ment'um, _n._ an argument.--The following are forms of
_indirect_ argument:--ARGUMENTUM AD HOMINEM, an appeal to the known
prepossessions or previous admissions of an opponent; ARGUMENTUM AD
IGNORANTIAM, an argument founded on the ignorance of an opponent;
ARGUMENTUM AD INVIDIAM, an argument appealing to the prejudices of the
person addressed; ARGUMENTUM AD JUDICIUM, an appeal to the common-sense of
mankind; ARGUMENTUM AD VERECUNDIAM, an appeal to our reverence for some
respected authority; ARGUMENTUM BACULINUM, the argument of the cudgel--most
concise of arguments, an appeal to force; ARGUMENTUM PER IMPOSSIBILE, or
_Reductio ad absurdum_, the proof of a conclusion derived from the
absurdity of a contradictory supposition.--For the _Ontological_,
_Cosmological_, _Teleological_, and _Moral_ arguments in Theism, see under
these adjectives.

ARGUS, ärg'us, _n._ any very quick-eyed or watchful person, from _Argus_,
described in Greek mythology as having had a hundred eyes, some of which
were always awake: a genus of gallinaceous birds, remarkable for
magnificence of plumage--the only known species, the ARGUS PHEASANT, native
to Sumatra, &c. [Gr.--_argos_, bright.]

ARGUTE, är-g[=u]t', _adj._ shrill in sound: keen: shrewd.--_adv._
ARGUTE'LY.--_n._ ARGUTE'NESS. [L. _argutus_.]

ARGYRIA, ar-jir'i-a, _n._ silver poisoning. [Gr. _argyros_, silver.]

ARIA, [=a]'ri-a, _n._ an air or rhythmical song introduced in a cantata,
oratorio, or opera, and intended for one voice supported by instruments.
[It., from root of AIR.]

ARIAN, [=a]'ri-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Arius_ of Alexandria (died 336),
who denied the divinity of Christ.--_n._ one who adheres to the doctrines
of Arius: a Unitarian.--_v.t._ A'RIANISE.--_n._ A'RIANISM, the doctrines of
the Arians.

ARID, ar'id, _adj._ dry: parched.--_ns._ ARID'ITY, AR'IDNESS. [L.
_aridus_.]

ARIEL, [=a]'ri-el, _n._ a man's name in the Old Testament, variously
explained as 'lion of God,' 'hearth of God:' in later demonology, a
water-spirit: an angel: a spirit of the air. [Heb. _ari[=e]l_.]

ARIEL, [=a]'ri-el, _n._ a species of gazelle in Western Asia. [Ar.
_aryil_.]

ARIES, [=a]'ri-[=e]z, _n._ the Ram, the first of the signs of the zodiac,
which the sun enters on 21st M_arch._ [L.]

ARIETTA, ar-i-et'ta, _n._ a little aria or air.--Also ARIETTE'. [It.
_arietta_, dim. of _aria_.]

ARIGHT, a-r[=i]t', _adv._ in a right way: rightly.

ARIL, ar'il, ARILLUS, a-ril'lus, _n._ a peculiar covering of the seed of
some plants, formed by an expansion of the cord (_funiculus_) which
attaches the ovule to the placenta, or of the placenta itself.--_adjs._
AR'ILLARY, AR'ILLATED, having an aril. [Low L. _arillus_.]

ARIMASPIAN, ar-im-as'pi-an, _adj._ pertaining to the _Arimaspi_, described
by Herodotus as a one-eyed and fierce people inhabiting the most northern
region in the world, waging perpetual warfare with the neighbouring
griffins for their hoarded gold.

ARIOT, ä-r[=i]'ot, _adv._ in riot, riotously.

ARIPPLE, ä-rip'l, _adv._ in a ripple, rippling.

ARISE, a-r[=i]z', _v.i._ to rise up: to come up so as to be heard: to
ascend: to come into view: to spring:--_pa.t._ arose'; _pa.p._ aris'en.
[Pfx. _a-_, up, out, and RISE.]

ARISTARCH, ar'is-tärk, _n._ a severe critic. [From _Aristarchus_, a
grammarian of Alexandria about 160 B.C.]

ARISTATE, a-ris't[=a]t, _adj._ (_bot._) having awns. [L. _arista_, an awn.]

ARISTOCRACY, ar-is-tok'ras-i, _n._ government by the men of best birth or
condition: political power of a privileged order: the nobility or chief
persons of a state: the upper classes generally, also the persons noted for
superiority in any quality, taken collectively--also ARISTARCH'Y
(_rare_).--_n._ ARISTOCRAT (ar'is-to-krat, or ar-is'-), one who belongs to
or favours an aristocracy: a haughty person.--_adjs._ ARISTOCRAT'IC, -AL,
belonging to aristocracy: gentlemanly, stylish.--_adv._
ARISTOCRAT'ICALLY.--_n._ ARISTOCRAT'ISM. [Gr. _aristos_, best, and
_kratos_, power.]

ARISTOLOCHIA, ar-is-t[=o]-l[=o]'ki-a, _n._ a genus of shrubs, many
climbers, specially abundant in tropical South America. [Gr.; _aristos_,
best, _locheia_, child-birth, the roots of several species being formerly
thought useful in parturition.]

ARISTOTELIAN, ar-is-to-t[=e]'li-an, _adj._ relating to _Aristotle_ or to
his philosophy.

ARITHMANCY, ar'ith-man-si, _n._ divination by numbers.--Also ARITH'MOMANCY.
[Gr. _arithmos_, number, and _manteia_, divination.]

ARITHMETIC, ar-ith'met-ik, _n._ the science of numbers: the art of
reckoning by figures: a treatise on reckoning.--_adj._
ARITHMET'ICAL.--_adv._ ARITHMET'ICALLY.--_n._ ARITHMETIC'IAN, one skilled
in arithmetic--ARITHMETICAL PROGRESSION, a series of numbers that increase
or diminish by a common difference, as 7, 10, 13, 16, 19, 22; or 12, 10½,
9, 7½, 6. To find the sum of such a series, multiply the sum of the first
and last terms by half the number of terms. [Gr. _arithm[=e]tik[=e]_
(_techn[=e]_, art), relating to numbers--_arithmos_, number.]

ARITHMOCRACY, ar-ith-mok'ras-i, _n._ a democracy of mere numbers.--_adj._
ARITHMOCRAT'IC. [A coinage of Kingsley--Gr. _arithmos_, number, _kratia_,
rule.]

ARITHMOMETER, ar-ith-mom'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for working out
arithmetical calculations. [Gr. _arithmos_, number, _metron_, measure.]

ARK, ärk, _n._ a chest or coffer: in Jewish history, the wooden coffer in
which the Tables of the Law were kept--hence TO TOUCH or LAY HANDS ON THE
ARK, to touch irreverently what is sacred (2 Sam. vi. 6): a large floating
vessel, like that in which Noah escaped the Deluge (Gen.
vi.-viii.).--_adj._ and _n._ ARK'ITE. [A.S. _arc_--L. _arca_, a
chest--_arc[=e]re_, to guard.]

ARLES, ärlz, or [=a]rlz, _n._ earnest money given in confirmation of a
bargain, or of the engagement of a servant.--_ns._ ARLE'-PEN'NY,
ARLES'-PEN'NY. [Scot. and northern Eng.; M. E. _erles_--O. Fr. _erres_
(mod. Fr. _arrhes_)--L. _arrha_.]

ARM, ärm, _n._ the limb extending from the shoulder to the hand: anything
projecting from the main body, as an inlet of the sea, a rail or support
from a chair, sofa, or the like: one of the branches into which a main
trunk divides: (_fig._) power.--_ns._ ARM'-CHAIR, a chair with arms;
ARM'FUL; ARM'-HOLE, the hole in a garment through which the arm is
put.--_adv._ ARM'-IN-ARM, with arms interlinked, in close
communion.--_adj._ ARM'LESS.--_ns._ ARM'LET, a bracelet; ARM'-PIT, the pit
or hollow under the shoulder.--AT ARM'S LENGTH, away from any friendliness
or familiarity.--RIGHT ARM, the main support or assistant; SECULAR ARM, the
secular or temporal authority, as distinguished from the spiritual or
ecclesiastical.--WITH OPEN ARMS, with hearty welcome. [A.S.; cog. with L.
_armus_, the shoulder-joint, Gr. _harmos_, a joint.]

ARM, ärm, _n._ a weapon: a branch of the military service:--_pl._ ARMS,
weapons of offence and defence: war, hostilities: deeds or exploits of war:
armorial ensigns.--_v.t._ ARM, to furnish with arms or weapons: to
fortify.--_v.i._ to take arms.--_n._ AR'MATURE, armour: any apparatus for
defence: a piece of iron connecting the poles of a bent magnet.--_adj._
ARMED (ärmd, or arm'ed), furnished with arms: provided with means of
defence: (_bot._) having prickles or thorns: (_her._) having part of the
body different in colour from the rest, as a beak, claws, &c. of a
bird.--_n.pl._ FIRE'ARMS, such weapons as employ gunpowder, as guns and
pistols.--_n._ MAN'-AT-ARMS, a fully equipped and practised fighting
man.--_n.pl._ SMALL'-ARMS, such as do not require carriages, as opposed to
artillery.--ARMED TO THE TEETH, completely armed.--COLLEGE OF ARMS, the
Heralds' College, which grants armorial bearings.--IN ARMS WITH, quartered
with; OF ALL ARMS, of every kind of troops; STAND OF ARMS, a complete
equipment of arms for one soldier.--THE ARMED EYE, strengthened with a
magnifying-glass, as opp. to _naked eye_.--TO LAY DOWN ARMS, to surrender
or submit; UP IN ARMS, in readiness to fight. [Through Fr. from L. _arma_;
cog. with ARM.]

ARMADA, ärm-[=a]'da, _n._ a fleet of armed ships, esp. the self-styled
_Invincible_ Armada sent by Philip II. against England in 1588. [Sp.--L.
_armata_, _armare_, to arm.]

ARMADILLO, ärm-a-dil'o, _n._ a small American edentate quadruped, having
its body armed with bands of bony plates:--_pl._ ARMADILL'OS. [Sp., dim. of
_armado_, armed.]

ARMAGEDDON, är-mag-ed'on, _n._ the great symbolical battlefield of the
Apocalypse, in which the final struggle between the powers of good and evil
is to be fought out. [The name was no doubt suggested by the famous
battlefield of _Megiddo_, in the plain of Esdraelon.]

ARMAMENT, ärm'a-ment, _n._ forces armed or equipped for war: munitions of
war, esp. the great guns with which a ship is armed. [L.
_armamenta_--_arma_.]

ARMENIAN, ar-m[=e]'ni-an, _adj._ belonging to _Armenia_, in Western Asia:
belonging to the Armenian branch of the Christian Church.--_n._ a native of
Armenia.

ARMET, är'met, _n._ a helmet introduced about 1450 in place of the basinet,
consisting of an iron cap, spreading over the back of the neck, having in
front the visor, beaver, and gorget. [Fr.]

ARMGAUNT, ärm'gänt, _adj._ (_Shak._ once, _Ant. and Cleop._ I. v. 48), with
gaunt limbs (?). The word has not been satisfactorily explained, and is
most likely an error.

ARMIGER, är'mi-j[.e]r, _n._ an armour-bearer: one entitled to a
coat-of-arms: an esquire--also ARMI'GERO (_Shak._).--_adj._ ARMI'GEROUS.
[L.; _arma_, arms, _ger[)e]re_, to bear.]

ARMILLARY, är'mil-lar-i, or är-mil'lar-i, _adj._ resembling an armlet or
bracelet: consisting of rings or circles.--_n._ ARMIL'LA, in archæology, a
bracelet: one of the coronation ornaments: the regalia.--ARMILLARY SPHERE,
an instrument constructed to show the motions of the heavenly bodies. [L.
_armilla_, an _armlet_. See ARM (1).]

ARMINIAN, ar-min'yan, _n._ a follower of _Arminius_ (1560-1609), a Dutch
divine, who denied the Calvinistic doctrine of absolute predestination, as
well as irresistible grace.--_adj._ holding the doctrines of
Arminius.--_n._ ARMIN'IANISM.

ARMIPOTENT, ärm-ip'[=o]-tent, _adj._ powerful in arms. [L. _arma_, arms,
_potens_, _-entis_, powerful.]

ARMISTICE, ärm'ist-is, _n._ a short suspension of hostilities: a truce.
[Fr.--Low L. _armistitium_, from L. _arma_, arms, _sist[)e]re_--_stitum_,
to stop.]

ARMOIRE, arm'war, _n._ an ambry or cupboard. [Fr.]

ARMORIC, ar-mor'ik, _n._ the language of the inhabitants of _Armorica_, the
ancient name for Brittany. [L. _Armoricus_--Celt. _are-mor_, before the
sea.]

ARMOUR, ärm'ur, _n._ defensive arms or dress: heraldic insignia: plating of
ships of war.--_adj._ ARM[=O]'RIAL, belonging to armour, or to the arms of
a family.--_ns._ ARM'OUR-BEAR'ER; ARM'OURER, a maker or repairer of, or one
who has the charge of, armour.--_adj._ ARM'OUR-PLAT'ED.--_ns._ ARM'OURY,
ARM'ORY, the place in which arms are made or kept: a collection of ancient
armour; COAT'-ARM'OUR, originally a vest of silk embroidered in colours,
worn by a knight over his armour. [See ARM (2).]

ARMOZEEN, ARMOZINE, är-mo-z[=e]n', _n._ a kind of taffeta or plain silk,
usually black, used for clerical gowns. [Fr. _armoisin_.]

ARMY, ärm'i, _n._ a large body of men armed for war and under military
command: a body of men banded together in a special cause, whether
travestying military methods, as the 'Salvation Army,' or not, as the 'Blue
Ribbon Army:' a host: a great number.--_ns._ ARM'Y-CORPS (-k[=o]r), a main
division of an army, a miniature army comprising all arms of the service;
ARM'Y-LIST, a list of all commissioned officers, issued periodically by the
War Office; ARM'Y-WORM, a European grub which collects in vast armies. [Fr.
_armée_--L. _armata_, _arm[=a]re_.]

ARNICA, är'ni-ka, _n._ a genus of composite plants, of which the species
_A. montana_, or Mountain Tobacco, formerly enjoyed a great repute in
medicine as a stimulant in paralytic affections, low fevers, &c.--its
flowers still yield a tincture externally applied to wounds and bruises.
[Mod. L.; origin unknown.]

ARNOTTO, ar-not'to. See ANATTA.

AROINT, a-roint', _interj._ (_Shak._) away! begone! used only twice in the
phrase, '_Aroint_ thee, witch:' to bid begone (_arch._ usage in
Browning).--_v.t._ to drive or frighten away. [Origin unknown; perh. in
some provincialism, like the Yorkshire _rynd-ta_, 'round-thee,'
'move-round,' spoken to a cow in her stall.]

AROMA, a-r[=o]'ma, _n._ sweet smell: the odorous principle of plants:
(_fig._) flavour or peculiar charm of any kind.--_adj._ AROMAT'IC,
fragrant: spicy.--_v.t._ AR[=O]'MATISE, to render aromatic: to
perfume:--_pr.p._ ar[=o]'matising; _pa.p._ ar[=o]'matised. [Through Fr. and
L. from Gr. _ar[=o]ma_.]

AROSE, a-r[=o]z', _pa.t._ of ARISE.

AROUND, a-rownd', _prep._ on all sides of: (_Amer._) round about.--_adv._
on every side: in a circle: (_Amer._) round, all about, [_a_, on, and
ROUND.]

AROUSE, a-rowz', _v.t._ and _v.i._ same as ROUSE.--_ns._ AROUSE, AROUS'AL
(_rare_).

AROW, a-r[=o]', _adv._ in a row: one following the other. [Prep. _a_, and
ROW.]

AROYNT. Same as AROINT.

ARPEGGIO, är-pej'[=o], _n._ (_mus._) a chord of which the notes are given,
not simultaneously, but in rapid succession. [It. _arpeggiare_, to play
upon the harp--_arpa_, harp.]

ARPENT, är'pent, _n._ an old French measure for land still used in Quebec
and Louisiana = 100 sq. perches, varying with the perch from 1¼ acre to 5/6
of an acre. [Fr.--L. _arepennis_, said to be a Gallic word.]

ARQUEBUSE, är'kwi-bus, _n._ an old-fashioned hand-gun--also
HAR'QUEBUS.--_n._ ARQUEBUSIER'. [Fr. _arquebuse_--Dut. _haakbus_--_haak_,
hook, and _bus_, box, barrel of a gun; Ger. _hakenbüchse_.]

ARRACACHA, ar-a-kach'ä, _n._ an umbelliferous plant with esculent roots,
native to the northern parts of South America. [Native Ind. name.]

ARRACK, ar'ak, _n._ an ardent spirit used in the East, procured from
_toddy_ or the fermented juice of the coco and other palms, as well as from
rice and _jaggery_ sugar. [Ar. _`araq_, juice.]

ARRAH, ar'a, _interj._ Anglo-Irish expletive of emotion, wonder, &c.

ARRAIGN, ar-r[=a]n', _v.t._ to call one to account: to put a prisoner upon
trial: to accuse publicly.--_ns._ ARRAIGN'ER; ARRAIGN'ING; ARRAIGN'MENT.
[O. Fr. _aresnier_--Low L. _arration[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _rationem_,
reason.]

ARRANGE, ar-r[=a]nj', _v.t._ to set in a rank or row: to put in order: to
settle: (_mus._) to adapt a composition for instruments or voices for which
it was not originally written, as when orchestral or vocal compositions are
set for the pianoforte, or the reverse.--_v.i._ to come to an
agreement.--_n._ ARRANGE'MENT, act of arranging: classification:
settlement. [O. Fr. _arangier_--_à_ (--L. _ad_, to), and _rangier_,
_rengier_. See RANGE.]

ARRANT, ar'rant, _adj._ downright, notorious (used in a bad sense):
unmitigated.--_adv._ AR'RANTLY. [A variant of ERRANT. From its use in
phrases like 'arrant thief,' it passed naturally into a general term used
with other terms of abuse.]

ARRAS, ar'ras, _n._ tapestry: a hanging screen of such hung round the walls
of rooms.--_p.adj._ AR'RASED, covered with arras.--_n._ AR'RASENE, an
embroidery material of wool and silk stitched in like crewels. [From
_Arras_ in Northern France, where first manufactured.]

ARRAUGHT, ar-rawt', _adj._ (_Spens._) seized on by force:--_pa.t._ and
_pa.p._ of ARREACH. [See REACH.]

ARRAY, ar-r[=a]', _n._ order: dress: equipage.--_v.t._ to put in order: to
arrange: to dress, adorn, or equip. [O. Fr. _arroi_, array, equipage--L.
_ad_, and a Teut. root, found in Eng. READY, Ger. _bereit_, A.S.
_ger['æ]de_, preparation, Dan. _rede_, order.]

ARREAR, ar-r[=e]r', _n._ that which is in the rear or behind: that which
remains unpaid or undone (used mostly in _pl._).--_adv._ ARREAR', backward,
behind.--_n._ ARREAR'AGE (_Shak._), arrears. [O. Fr. _arere_, _ariere_ (Fr.
_arrière_)--L. _ad_, to, _retro_, back, behind.]

ARRECT, a-rekt', _adj._ upright: erected, as the ears: on the alert. [L.
_arrectus_.]

ARREST, ar-rest', _v.t._ to stop: to seize: to catch the attention: to
apprehend by legal authority.--_n._ stoppage: seizure by warrant.--_adj._
ARREST'ABLE, liable to be arrested.--_n._ ARREST[=A]'TION, the act of
arresting: arrest.--_adj._ ARREST'IVE, with a tendency to arrest.--_n._
ARREST'MENT (_law_), detention of a person arrested till liberated on bail,
or by security: (_Scots law_) the process which prohibits a debtor from
making payment to his creditor until another debt due to the person making
use of the arrestment by such creditor is paid. [O. Fr. _arester_--L. _ad_,
to, _rest[=a]re_, to stand still.]

ARRET, ar-ret', or a-r[=a]', _n._ decision: judgment of a
tribunal--properly of the king or parliament of France. [Fr. _arrêt_. See
ARREST.]

ARRIDE, a-r[=i]d', _v.t._ (_Lamb_) to please, gratify. [L. _arrid[=e]-re_.]

ARRIÈRE-BAN, är'yer-bän, or ä-r[=e]r'ban, _n._ in feudal times, the
sovereign's summons to all freemen to take the field: the army thus
collected. [O. Fr. _ariereban_, Old High Ger. _hari_, army, and _ban_,
public proclamation.]

ARRIS, ar'ris, _n._ a sharp ridge or edge on stone or metal. [See ARÊTE.]

ARRIVE, ar-r[=i]v', _v.i._ to reach any place: to attain to any object
(with _at_).--_ns._ ARR[=I]V'AL, the act of arriving: persons or things
that arrive; ARR[=I]V'ANCE (_Shak._), company arriving. [O. Fr.
_ariver_--Low L. _adrip[=a]re_--L. _ad_, to, _ripa_, a bank.]

ARROBA, a-r[=o]'ba, _n._ a weight of 25 or more pounds, used in Spanish and
Portuguese regions. [Ar.]

ARROGATE, ar'rog-[=a]t, _v.t._ to claim as one's own: to claim proudly or
unduly.--_ns._ AR'ROGANCE, AR'ROGANCY, undue assumption of
importance.--_adj._ AR'ROGANT, claiming too much: overbearing.--_adv._
AR'ROGANTLY.--_n._ ARROG[=A]'TION, act of arrogating: undue assumption. [L.
_arrog[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _rog[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to ask, to claim.]

ARRONDISSEMENT, ar-ron'd[=e]s-mäng, _n._ a subdivision of a French
department, comprising a number of communes. [Fr.--_arrondir_, to make
round.]

ARROW, ar'r[=o], _n._ a straight, pointed weapon, made to be shot from a
bow: any arrow-shaped pin or ornament: the chief shoot of a plant, esp. the
flowering stem of the sugar-cane.--_n._ AR'ROW-HEAD, the head or pointed
part of an arrow: an aquatic plant native to England, with arrow-shaped
leaves rising above the water--reputed good for hydrophobia.--_adj._
AR'ROW-HEAD'ED, shaped like the head of an arrow.--_n._ AR'ROW-SHOT, the
distance traversed by an arrow.--_adj._ AR'ROWY, of or like arrows. [A.S.
_earh_, _arwe_; cog. with L. _arcus_; akin to Ice. _ör_, _örvar_.]

ARROWROOT, ar'r[=o]-r[=oo]t, _n._ a starch obtained from the roots of
certain plants growing chiefly in West Indies, and much used as food for
invalids and children. [Said to be so named because used by the Indians of
South America as an antidote against wounds caused by poisoned _arrows_.]

'ARRY, ar'i, _n._ a jovial vulgar fellow who drops his h's:--_fem._
'AR'RIET.--_adj._ 'AR'RYISH, in holiday spirits. [From the vulgar Cockney
pronunciation of _Harry_.]

ARSE, ärs, _n._ the posterior parts of an animal.--_adv._ and _adj._
ARS'Y-VERS'Y, backside foremost, contrary. [A.S. _ears_; Ger. _arsch_, Sw.
_ars_; cog. with Gr. _orros_.]

ARSENAL, är'se-nal, _n._ a dock possessing naval stores: a public magazine
or manufactory of naval and military stores. [It. _arzenale_, _arsenale_
(Sp., Fr. _arsenal_)--Ar. _d[=a]r aççin[=a]`ah_, workshop; _d[=a]r_, house,
_al_, the, _cin[=a]`ah_, art.]

ARSENIC, ar'sen-ik, _n._ one of the chemical elements: a mineral poison: a
soft, gray-coloured metal.--_ns._ AR'SENATE, ARS[=E]'NIATE, a salt of
arsenic acid.--_adjs._ ARSEN'IC, -AL, composed of or containing arsenic: in
chemistry, applied to compounds; ARS[=E]'NIOUS, of or containing
arsenic.--_n._ AR'SENITE, a salt of arsenious acid. [Gr. _arsenikon_,
_arsen_, male; the alchemists fancied some metals male, others female.]

ARSIS, ar'sis, _n._ grammatical term applied to the elevation of the voice
to a higher pitch in speaking: (_mus._) the strong position in a bar: the
strong syllable in English metre:--_pl._ AR'S[=E]S. [L.--Gr.
_arsis_--_airein_, to lift.]

ARSON, ärs'on, _n._ the crime of wilfully burning houses or other
buildings.--_ns._ AR'SONITE, AR'SONIST (_rare_). [O. Fr. _arson_--L.
_arsion-em_, _ard[=e]re_, _arsum_, to burn.]

ART, ärt, 2d pers. sing. of the present tense of the verb _To be_. [A.S.
_eart._]

ART, ärt, _n._ practical skill guided by rules: human skill as opposed to
nature: skill as applied to subjects of taste, the fine arts--music,
painting, sculpture, architecture, and poetry: (_pl._) specially used of
certain branches of learning to be acquired as necessary for pursuit of
higher studies, or for the work of life, as in phrase 'faculty of arts,
master of arts:' the rules and methods of doing certain actions: a
profession, skilled trade, or craft: contrivance: cunning, artfulness, or
address: artifice, special faculty of some kind acquired by practice,
skill, dexterity, knack: special faculty of giving expression to æsthetic
or artistic quality, as in _art-furniture_, &c., supposed, by the buyer, in
this respect, to justify its price.--_adj._ ART'FUL, full of art: (_arch._)
dexterous, clever: cunning: produced by art.--_adv._ ART'FULLY.--_n._
ART'FULNESS.--_adj._ ART'LESS, simple: (_rare_) inartistic: guileless,
unaffected.--_adv._ ART'LESSLY.--_ns._ ART'LESSNESS; ARTS'MAN, one who
cultivates some practical knowledge: (_arch._) a man skilled in arts or in
learning.--_n.pl._ ART'-UN'IONS, associations having for their object the
promotion of an interest in the fine arts.--ART AND PART, as in the phrase
'to be art and part in,' originally in legal expressions like 'to be
concerned in either by art or part'--i.e. either by _art_ in contriving or
by _part_ in actual execution; now loosely used in the sense of
participating, sharing.--USEFUL ARTS as opposed to _Fine arts_, those in
which the hands and body are more concerned than the mind.--SCIENCE and ART
differ essentially in their aims--_Science_, in Mill's words, 'takes
cognisance of a _phenomenon_, and endeavours to ascertain its _law_; _Art_
proposes to itself an _end_, and looks out for means to effect it.' [L.
_ars_, _artis_. See ARM.]

ARTEMISIA, är-t[=e]-miz'i-a, _n._ a genus of composite plants, with a
peculiarly bitter taste, including Wormwood, Southernwood, &c.

ARTERY, är't[.e]r-i, _n._ a tube or vessel which conveys blood from the
heart (see AORTA)--also metaphorically: any main channel of
communication.--_adj._ ART[=E]R'IAL--_v.t._ ART[=E]R'IALISE, to make
arterial.--_ns._ ART[=E]RIOT'OMY, the cutting or opening of an artery, to
let blood; ARTER[=I]'TIS, inflammation of an artery. [L.--Gr. _art[=e]ria_,
orig. the windpipe most probably--Gr. _air-ein_, to raise. The ancient
conception of the artery as an air-duct gave rise to the derivation from
Gr. _a[=e]r_, air.]

ARTESIAN, är-t[=e]'zhan, _adj._ applied to wells made by boring until water
is reached. [From _Artois_ (L. _Artesium_), in the north of France, where
the oldest known well of this kind in Europe was sunk in 1126.]

ARTHRITIS, ar-thr[=i]'tis, _n._ inflammation of a joint: gout.--_adj._
ARTHRIT'IC, relating to or affecting the joints: gouty. [Gr.
_arthritikos_--_arthron_, a joint.]

ARTHROPODA, ar-throp'od-a, _n.pl._ a great division of the animal kingdom,
the body consisting of a definite number of segments, each having a pair of
hollow jointed limbs into which the body muscles proceed. It again divides
into two great groups--the water-breathers or Branchiata, and the
air-breathers or Tracheata.--_adj._ ARTHROP'ODAL. [Gr. _arthron_, joint,
and _pous_, _pod-os_, a foot.]

ARTICHOKE, är'ti-ch[=o]k, _n._ a thistle-like, perennial, eatable plant
with large scaly heads, like the cone of the pine, now growing wild in the
south of Europe, though probably a native of Asia.--JERUSALEM ARTICHOKE, a
totally different plant, a species of sunflower, bearing tubers like those
of the potato, Jerusalem being a corr. of It. _girasole_ ('turn-sun'),
sunflower. By a quibble on Jerusalem, the soup made from it is called
_Palestine soup_. [Old It. _articiocco_ (It. _carciofo_)--Old Sp.
_alcarchofa_--Ar. _al_-_kharsh[=o]fa_, _al-kharshuf_. Popular definitions
are many--e.g. the plant that _chokes_ the _garden_ or the _heart_.]

ARTICLE, ärt'i-kl, _n._ a separate element, member, or part of anything: a
particular substance: a single clause or term: a distinct point in an
agreement, or an agreement looked at as complete, as in 'articles of
apprenticeship,' &c.: rules or conditions generally: a section of any
document: a literary composition in a journal, newspaper, encyclopædia,
&c., treating of a subject distinctly and independently: (_gram._) the name
given to the adjectives _the_ (definite article) and _a_ or _an_
(indefinite article).--_v.t._ to draw up or bind by articles: to indict,
charge with specific accusations: bind by articles of
apprenticeship.--_adj._ ARTIC'ULAR, belonging to the joints.--ARTICLES OF
ASSOCIATION, regulations for the business of a joint-stock company
registered under the Companies Acts; ARTICLES OF FAITH, binding statement
of points held by a particular Church; ARTICLES OF WAR, code of regulations
for the government and discipline of the army and navy.--IN THE ARTICLE OF
DEATH (L. _in articulo mortis_), at the point of death.--LORDS OF THE
ARTICLES, a standing committee of the Scottish parliament who drafted the
measures to be submitted.--THE THIRTY-NINE ARTICLES, the articles of
religious belief finally agreed upon by the entire bishops and clergy of
the Church of England in 1562. [L. _articulus_, a little joint--_artus_, a
joint.]

ARTICULATA, är-tik-[=u]-l[=a]'ta, _n._ one of the great primary divisions
of the animal kingdom, according to Cuvier, including those animals of
which the body is divided into a number of distinct joints--viz. the higher
worms or Annelids, and also the Insects, Crustaceans, Arachnids, and
Myriopods.

ARTICULATE, är-tik'[=u]l-[=a]t, _adj._ distinct: clear.--_v.t._ to joint:
to form into distinct sounds, syllables, or words.--_v.i._ to speak
distinctly.--_adv._ ARTIC'ULATELY.--_ns._ ARTIC'ULATENESS;
ARTICUL[=A]'TION, a joining as of the bones: part between two joints:
distinctness, or distinct utterance: a consonant; ARTIC'ULATOR, one who
articulates or speaks: one who articulates bones and mounts skeletons. [L.
_articul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to furnish with joints, to utter distinctly.
See ARTICLE.]

ARTIFICE, art'i-fis, _n._ artificer's work: a contrivance: a trick or
fraud.--_n._ ARTIF'ICER, a workman: an inventor.--_adj._ ARTIFICIAL
(ärt-i-fish'yal), made by art: not natural: cultivated: not indigenous:
feigned: not natural in manners, affected.--_v.t._ and _v.i._
ARTIFIC'IALISE, to render artificial.--_ns._ ARTIFICIAL'ITY,
ARTIFIC'IALNESS.--_adv._ ARTIFIC'IALLY. [L. _artificium_--_artifex_,
_-ficis_, an artificer--_ars_, _artis_, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ARTILLERY, är-til'[.e]r-i, _n._ offensive weapons of war, esp. cannon,
mortars, &c.: the men who manage them: a branch of the military service:
gunnery.--_ns._ ARTILL'ERIST, one skilled in artillery or gunnery;
ARTILL'ERY-MAN, a soldier of the artillery. [O. Fr. _artillerie_,
_artiller_, to arm; through a supposed Low L. _artill[=a]re_--L. _ars_,
_artis_, art.]

ARTIODACTYLA, är-ti-o-dak'til-a, _n._ a sub-order of the great mammalian
order of Ungulata, having the third digit unsymmetrical in itself, but
forming a symmetrical pair with the fourth digit--as distinguished from the
_Perissodactyla_ (horse, tapir, rhinoceros), which have the third digit of
each limb symmetrical in itself, an odd number of digits on the hind-foot,
and at least twenty-two dorso-lumbar vertebræ. The Artiodactyla, again,
divide into two groups, the Non-Ruminantia and the Ruminantia.

ARTISAN, ärt'i-zan, _n._ one skilled in any art or trade: a mechanic.
[Fr.--It. _artigiano_, ult. from L. _artitus_, skilled in the arts--_ars_,
_artis_, art.]

ARTIST, ärt'ist, _n._ one who practises an art, esp. one of the fine arts,
as painting, sculpture, engraving, or architecture.--_adjs._ ARTIST'IC,
-AL, according to art.--_adv._ ARTIST'ICALLY.--_n._ ART'ISTRY, artistic
pursuits: artistic workmanship, quality, or ability. [Fr. _artiste_, It.
_artista_--L. _ars_, _artis_, art.]

ARTISTE, är-t[=e]st', _n._ one dexterous or tasteful in any art, as an
opera dancer, a cook, a hairdresser, &c. [Fr.]

ART-UNION. See ART.

ARUM, [=a]'rum, _n._ a genus of plants represented in England by the
Cuckoo-pint or Wake Robin (_A. maculatum_), whose root yields a wholesome
farina known as Portland Sago or Arrowroot. [L.--Gr. _aron_.]

ARUNDINACEOUS, a-run-di-n[=a]'shus, _adj._ relating to or like a
reed.--Also ARUNDIN'EOUS. [L. _arundinaceus_--_arundo_, a reed.]

ARUSPEX, ARUSPICE, ARUSPICY. See HARUSPEX.

ARVICOLA, är-vik'[=o]-lä, _n._ the general name of the family of animals to
which belong the water-vole and field-vole. [Coined from L. _arvum_, a
field, _col[)e]-re_, to inhabit.]

ARY, ä'ri, e'ri, _adj._ (_prov._) any. [A modification of _e'er a_ for
_ever a_. Cf. NARY.]

ARYAN, ar'i-an, or [=a]'ri-an, _adj._ relating to the family of nations
otherwise called Indo-European (comprehending the inhabitants of
Europe--except the Basques, Turks, Magyars, and Finns--and those of
Armenia, Persia, and North Hindustan), or to their languages--Sanskrit,
Zend, Greek, Latin, Celtic, Teutonic, Slavonic, Lettic.--_v.t._ ARYANISE'.
[L. _arianus_, belonging to _Ariana_ or _Aria_ (Gr. _Areia_), the east part
of Ancient Persia--Sans. _Arya_ (cf. Old Pers. _Ariya_, and _Ir[=a]n_,
Persia), often traced to a root _ar_, plough.]

AS, az, _adv._, _conj._, and _pron._ in that degree, so far, _as ... as_:
the consequent in a co-relation expressing quantity, degree, &c., _as ...
as_, _such ... as_, _same ... as_: since, because: when, while: expressing
merely continuation or expansion, for instance: similarly: for example:
while: in like manner: that, who, which (after _such_, _same_).--AS
CONCERNING, AS TO, AS FOR, so far as concerns; AS IT WERE, so to speak, in
some sort; AS MUCH, the same; AS WELL (AS), just as much (as), equally
(with). [A worn-down form of _all-so_, A.S. _all-swá_, wholly so.]

AS, as, _n._ in Norse mythology, one of the gods, the inhabitants of
_Asgard_:--_pl._ AESIR ([=a]'ser). [Ice. _[=a]ss_, a god (pl. _æsir_)--A.S.
_[=o]s_, seen in such proper names as _Os_wold, _Os_ric.]

AS, as, _n._ Latin unit of weight, 12 ounces (L. _unciæ_): a copper coin,
the unit of the early monetary system of Rome.

ASAFOETIDA, as-a-fet'i-da, _n._ a medicinal gum-resin, having an offensive
smell, procured by drying the milky juice which flows from the root of the
plant _Ferula_ (_Narthex_) _asafoetida_. [Pers. _az[=a]_, mastic, and L.
_foetida_, stinking.]

ÅSAR, [=e]'sar, _n.pl._ the Swedish name for those long, winding banks and
ridges of gravel and sand which occur abundantly in the low grounds of
Sweden, supposed to mark the site of sub-glacial streams and rivers.--These
_åsar_ are the same as the Irish _eskar_ and the Scotch _kames_.

ASARABACCA, as-a-ra-bak'a, _n._ a European plant, a species of _Asarum_,
having acrid properties, formerly used in the preparation of snuffs for
catarrh, &c. [L. _asarum_, _bacca_, a berry.]

ASBESTOS, az-best'os, _n._ an incombustible mineral, a variety of
hornblende, of a fine fibrous texture, resembling flax: (_fig._) anything
unquenchable.--_adjs._ ASBES'TIC, ASBES'TOUS, ASBES'TINE, of or like
asbestos: incombustible. [Gr.; (lit.) unquenchable--_a_, neg., _sbestos_,
extinguished.]

ASCARIS, as'ka-ris, _n._ a genus of parasitic worms, of the family
ASCAR'IDÆ, infesting the small intestines. [Gr. _askaris_, pl.
_askarides_.]

ASCEND, as-send', _v.i._ to climb or mount up: to rise, literally or
figuratively: to go backwards in the order of time.--_v.t._ to climb or go
up on: to mount.--_adjs._ ASCEND'ABLE, ASCEND'IBLE.--ASCENDING RHYTHM, in
prosody, a rhythm in which the arsis follows the thesis, as an iambic or
anapæstic rhythm: opposed to _descending_ rhythms, as the trochaic and
dactylic. [L. _ascend[)e]re_, _ascensum_--_ad_, and _scand[)e]re_, to
climb.]

ASCENSION, as-sen'shun, _n._ a rising or going up.--_adjs._ ASCEND'ANT,
-ENT, superior: above the horizon.--_n._ superiority: (_astrol._) the part
of the ecliptic rising above the horizon at the time of one's birth; it was
supposed to have commanding influence over the person's life, hence the
phrase, 'in the ascendant:' superiority or great influence: (_rare_) an
ancestor.--_n._ ASCEND'ENCY, controlling influence--also ASCEND'ANCY,
ASCEND'ANCE, ASCEND'ENCE (_rare_).--_adj._ ASCEN'SIONAL, relating to
ascension.--_n._ ASCEN'SION-DAY, the festival held on Holy Thursday, ten
days before Whitsunday, to commemorate Christ's _ascension_ to
heaven.--_adj._ ASCEN'SIVE, rising: causing to rise.--_n._ ASCENT', act of
ascending: upward movement, as of a balloon: way of ascending: degree of
elevation or advancement: slope or gradient: a flight of steps.--LINE OF
ASCENT, ancestry.--RIGHT ASCENSION (_astron._), the name applied to one of
the arcs which determine the position relatively to the equator of a
heavenly body on the celestial sphere, the other being the declinator. [L.
_ascensio_--_ascend[)e]re_.]

ASCERTAIN, as-s[.e]r-t[=a]n', _v.t._ to determine: to obtain certain
knowledge of: (_rare_) to insure, certify, make certain.--_adj._
ASCERTAIN'ABLE.--_n._ ASCERTAIN'MENT. [O. Fr. _acertener_. See CERTAIN.]

ASCETIC, as-set'ik, _n._ one who rigidly denies himself ordinary sensual
gratifications for conscience' sake, one who aims to compass holiness
through self-mortification, the flesh being considered as the seat of sin,
and therefore to be chastened: a strict hermit.--_adjs._ ASCET'IC, -AL,
excessively rigid: austere: recluse.--_adv._ ASCET'ICALLY.--_n._
ASCET'ICISM. [Gr. _ask[=e]tikos_ (adj. _ask[=e]t[=e]s_), one that uses
exercises to train himself--_askein_, to work, take exercise, (_eccles._)
to mortify the body.]

ASCIAN, ash'yan, _n._ name given to the inhabitants of the torrid zone, who
are shadowless at certain seasons, from the sun being right over their
heads. [Gr. _askios_, shadowless--_a_, neg., _skia_, a shadow.]

ASCIDIANS, a-sid'i-anz, _n.pl._ a group belonging to the tunicate Mollusca,
forming a class of degenerate survivors of ancestral vertebrates,
asymmetrical marine animals with a tubular heart and no feet, of a
double-mouthed flask shape, found at low-water mark on the sea-beach.--_n._
ASCID'IUM, a genus of Ascidians: (_bot._) a pitcher-shaped, leafy
formation, as in the _Nepenthes_. [Gr. _askidion_, dim. of _askos_, a
leathern bag, wine-skin.]

ASCITITIOUS. Same as ADSCITITIOUS.

ASCLEPIAD, as-kl[=e]'pi-ad, ASCLEPIADIC, as-kl[=e]-pi-ad'ik, _n._ in
ancient prosody, a verse consisting of a spondee, two (or three) choriambi,
and an iambus: [--|-uu-|-uu-|u-|]--_adj._ ASCLEPIAD'IC. [_Asclepiad[=e]s_,
a Greek poet.]

ASCLEPIADS, as-kl[=e]'pi-adz, _n.pl._ an order of Greek physicians, priests
of Asclepius or Æsculapius, the god of medicine. [Gr. _askl[=e]pius_,
Asclepius.]

ASCLEPIAS, as-kl[=e]'pi-as, _n._ a genus of plants, native to North
America, giving name to the natural order of the Asclepidaceæ, and
containing the milk-weed, swallow-wort, &c.

ASCRIBE, a-skr[=i]b', _v.t._ to attribute, impute, or assign.--_adj._
ASCRIB'ABLE.--_n._ ASCRIP'TION, act of ascribing or imputing: any
expression of ascribing, or any formula for such, like the one ascribing
glory to God repeated at the end of a sermon. [L. _ascrib[)e]re_,
_-scriptum_--_ad_, to, _scrib-[)e]re_, to write.]

ASEITY, a-s[=e]'i-ti, _n._ self-origination. [L. _a_, from, _se_, self.]

ASEPTIC, a-sep'tik, _adj._ not liable to decay or putrefaction.--_n._
ASEP'TICISM. [From Gr. _a_, neg., _s[=e]ptos_, _s[=e]pomai_, to decay.]

ASEXUAL, a-seks'[=u]-al, _adj._ without sex, once applied to
cryptogams--agamic. [Gr. _a_, neg., and SEXUAL.]

ASGARD, as'gärd, _n._ the heaven of Norse mythology, abode of the twelve
gods and twenty-six goddesses, and of heroes slain in battle. [Ice.
_asgardhr_, _[=a]ss_, a god, _gardhr_, an enclosure.]

ASH, ash, _n._ a well-known timber tree, or its wood, which is white,
tough, and hard, much used in carpentry and wheel-work: the ashen shaft of
a spear, or a spear itself.--_adj._ ASH'EN.--_n._ GROUND'-ASH, or
ASH'-PLANT, an ash sapling.--MOUNTAIN ASH, the rowan-tree; QUAKING ASH, the
aspen. [A.S. _æsc_--Ger. _esche_, Ice. _askr_.]

ASHAKE, a-sh[=a]k', _adv. phrase_, shaking. [Prep. _a_, and SHAKE.]

ASHAMED, a-sh[=a]md', _adj._ affected with shame (with _of_ for the cause
of shame; _for_, the person).--_v.t._ and _v.i._ ASHAME', to feel shame: to
put to shame.--_n._ ASHAMED'NESS.--_p.adj._ ASHAM'ING. [Pa.p. of old verb
_ashame_.]

ASHES, ash'ez, _n.pl._ the dust or remains of anything burnt: the remains
of the human body when burnt: (_fig._) a dead body: used to express pallor,
from the colour of wood-ashes, as in 'pale as ashes,' 'ashy-pale.'--_n._
ASH'-BUCK'ET, a box or bucket in which house-ashes and general refuse are
collected for removal.--_adjs._ ASH'EN, ASH'EN-GRAY.--_ns._ ASH'ERY, a
place where potash or pearl-ash is made; ASH'-HEAP, a heap of ashes and
household refuse; ASH'-LEACH, a tub in which alkaline salts are dissolved
from wood-ashes; ASH'-PAN, a kind of tray fitted underneath a grate to
receive the ashes.--_adjs._ ASH'Y, ASH'Y-GRAY.--TO LAY IN ASHES, to destroy
utterly by burning. [A.S. _asce_; Ice. _aska_.]

ASHET, ash'et, _n._ (now only _Scot._) a large flat dish in which meat is
served. [Fr. _assiette_.]

ASHIVER, a-shiv'[.e]r, _adv. phrase_, quivering.

ASHKENAZIM, ash-k[=e]-naz'im, _n.pl._ the Polish and German Jews, as
distinguished from the _Sephardim_, the Spanish and Portuguese Jews. [Heb.
_Ashkenaz_, the name of a northern people in Gen. x., located in Arabia, by
later Jews identified with Germany.]

ASHLAR, ash'lar, ASHLER, ash'l[.e]r, _n._ hewn or squared stone used in
facing a wall, as distinguished from rough, as it comes from the
quarry--also in ASH'LAR-WORK, as opposed to _Rubble-work_.--_p.adj._
ASH'LARED.--_n._ ASH'LARING. [O. Fr. _aiseler_--L. _axillaris_, _axilla_,
dim. of _axis_, _assis_, axle; also plank (cf. Fr. _ais_, It. _asse_.]

ASHORE, a-sh[=o]r', _adv._ on shore. [Prep. _a_, and SHORE.]

ASH-WEDNESDAY, ash-wenz'd[=a], _n._ the first day of Lent, so called from
the Roman Catholic custom of sprinkling ashes on the head.

ASIAN, [=a]zh'yan, or [=a]sh'i-an, ASIATIC, [=a]-zhi-at'ik, or
[=a]sh-i-at'ik, _adj._ belonging to Asia: florid in literature or
art.--_n._ ASIAT'ICISM, imitation of Asiatic or Eastern manners.

ASIDE, a-s[=i]d', _adv._ on or to one side: privately: apart.--_n._ words
spoken in an undertone, so as not to be heard by some person present, words
spoken by an actor which the other persons on the stage are supposed not to
hear: an indirect effort of any kind.--_adj._ private, apart.--TO SET
ASIDE, to quash (a judgment).

ASINEGO, as-i-n[=e]'go, _n._ (_Shak._) a stupid fellow.--Also ASINI'CO.
[Sp. _asnico_--dim. of _asno_, L. _asinus_, ass.]

ASININE, as'in-[=i]n, _adj._ of or like an ass.--_n._ ASININ'ITY. [See
ASS.]

ASK, ask, _v.t._ to seek: to request, inquire, beg, question,
invite.--_v.i._ to request: to make inquiry (with _about_ and _for_--as to
ask one _after_ or _for_ another). [A.S. _áscian_, _ácsian_; Ger.
_heischen_, Ice. _æskja_, Sans. _esh_, to desire.]

ASKANCE, a-skans', ASKANT, a-skant', _adv._ sideways: awry: obliquely: with
a side glance, or with a side meaning.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to turn aside.--TO
EYE, LOOK, or VIEW ASKANCE, to look at with suspicion. [Ety. very obscure;
perh. conn. with It. _a schiáncio_, slopingly, or with Ice. _á-ská_, as in
ASKEW.]

ASKEW, a-sk[=u]', _adv._ obliquely: aside: awry. [See ASKANCE.]

ASLAKE, a-sl[=a]k', _v.t._ (_arch._) to slake: to mitigate. [Prep. _a_, and
SLAKE.]

ASLANT, a-slant', _adj._ or _adv._ obliquely.--Also ASKLENT' (_Scot._).

ASLEEP, a-sl[=e]p', _adj._ or _adv._ in sleep: sleeping: in the sleep of
death, dead. [Prep. _a_, and SLEEP.]

ASLOPE, a-sl[=o]p', _adj._ or _adv._ on the slope.

ASMOULDER, a-sm[=o]l'der, _adv. phrase_, smouldering.

ASNORT, a-snort', _adv. phrase_, snorting. [Prep. _a_, and SNORT.]

ASP, asp, ASPIC, asp'ik, _n._ a popular name applied loosely to various
genera of venomous serpents--now chiefly to the _Vipera aspis_ of Southern
Europe. Cleopatra's asp was probably the small _Vipera hasselquistii_, or
horned viper: the biblical asp (Heb. _pethen_) was probably the Egyptian
juggler's snake (_Naja haje_). [L.--Gr. _aspis_.]

ASPARAGUS, as-par'a-gus, _n._ a plant cultivated for its young shoots,
esteemed as a table delicacy.--_n._ ASPAR'AGINE, a nitrogenised
crystallised substance found in asparagus and other
vegetables.--_Sparrow-grass_ was long the form of the word in English.
[L.--Gr. _asparagos_.]

ASPECT, as'pekt (in _Shak._ and elsewhere, as-pekt'), _n._ look: view:
appearance, also applied figuratively to the mind: position in relation to
the points of the compass: the situation of one planet with respect to
another, as seen from the earth.--_v.i._ (_obs._) to look at.--_adj._
AS'PECTABLE, visible, worth looking at. [L. _aspectus_--_ad_, at,
_spec[)e]re_, to look.]

ASPEN, asp'en, _n._ the trembling poplar.--_adj._ made of or like the
aspen: tremulous: timorous.--_adj._ AS'PEN-LIKE. [A.S. _æspe_, Ger.
_espe_.]

ASPER, as'p[.e]r, _n._ a small silver Turkish coin.

ASPERATED. See ASPIRATE.

ASPERGES, as-per'jes, _n._ a short service introductory to the mass, so
called from the words _Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo et mundabor_ (Ps. li.).

ASPERGILL, -UM, as'p[.e]r-jil, -um, _n._ a kind of brush used in R.C.
churches for sprinkling holy water on the people.--Also ASPERGE',
ASPER'SOIR. [L. _asperg[)e]re_, to sprinkle, and dim. suffix.]

ASPERGILLUM, as-p[.e]r-jil'um, _n._ a remarkable genus of boring
Lamellibranch Molluscs, in which the shell has the form of an elongated
cone, terminating at the lower end in a disc, pierced by numerous small
tubular holes.--_n._ ASPERGIL'LUS, the name of a genus of minute fungi or
moulds occurring on decaying substances of various kinds.

ASPERITY, as-per'i-ti, _n._ roughness: harshness: bitter coldness. [L.
_asperitat-em_, _asper_, rough.]

ASPERMOUS, a-sp[.e]r'mus, ASPERMATOUS, a-sp[.e]r'ma-tus, _adj._ without
seeds. [Gr. _a_, neg., _sperma_, seed.]

ASPERSE, as-p[.e]rs', _v.t._ to slander or calumniate: to bespatter
(_with_).--_n._ ASPER'SION, calumny: slander: (_Shak._) a shower or
spray.--_adjs._ ASPERS'IVE, ASPERS'ORY, tending to asperse: defamatory.

ASPERSORIUM, as-per-s[=o]r'i-um, _n._ a vessel used in R.C. churches for
holding holy water.

ASPHALT, as-falt', or as'falt, ASPHALTUM, as-falt'um, _n._ a black or
dark-brown, hard, bituminous substance, anciently used as a cement, and now
for paving, cisterns, water-pipes, &c.--_v.t._ ASPHALT', to lay or cover
with asphalt.--_adj._ ASPHALT'IC. [Gr. _asphaltos_, from an Eastern word.]

ASPHETERISM, as-fet'er-izm, _n._ (_Southey_) denial of the right of private
property.--_v.i._ ASPHET'ERISE. [Gr. _a_, neg., and _spheteros_, one's
own.]

ASPHODEL, as'fo-del, _n._ a kind of lily--in Greek mythology, the peculiar
plant of the dead. In Greece they cover the bleakest hillsides with
enduring blossom.--_adj._ Elysian. [Gr. _asphodelos_, a plant of the lily
kind; cf. Homer's _asphodelos leim[=o]n_, the meadow of the dead. See
DAFFODIL.]

ASPHYXIA, as-fik'si-a, _n._ (_lit._) suspended animation, suffocation, when
the blood is in such a state as to render impossible a sufficiently free
exchange of carbonic acid for oxygen--also ASPHYX'Y.--_n._ ASPHYX'IANT, a
chemical substance which produces asphyxia.--_adj._ ASPHYX'I[=A]TED.--_ns._
ASPHYXI[=A]'TION; ASPHYX'I[=A]TOR. [Gr., a stopping of the pulse--_a_,
neg., _sphyxis_, the pulse.]

ASPIC, ASPICK, as'pik, _n._ (_poet._) a venomous serpent. [See ASP.]

ASPIC, as'pik, _n._ a savoury meat-jelly containing fish, game, hard-boiled
eggs, &c. [Littré suggests its derivation from _aspic_, asp, because it is
'cold as an aspic,' a French proverb.]

ASPIRANT, as-p[=i]r'ant, or as'pir-ant, _n._ one who aspires (with _after_,
_for_): a candidate.--_adj._ ambitious: mounting up (_rare_ in both
senses). [See ASPIRE.]

ASPIRATE, as'pir-[=a]t, _v.t._ to pronounce with a full breathing, as the
letter _h_ in _house_.--_n._ a mark of aspiration, the rough breathing in
Greek (`): an aspirated letter.--_p.adj._ AS'PERATED, made harsh.--_ns._
ASPIR[=A]'TION, pronunciation of a letter with a full breathing: an
aspirated sound (like Gr. _ch_, _th_, &c.): drawing air in; ASPIR[=A]'TOR,
an apparatus for drawing air or other gases through bottles or other
vessels: (_med._) an instrument for removing fluids from the cavities of
the body.--_adj._ ASP[=I]R'ATORY, relating to breathing.--TO DROP ONE'S
ASPIRATES, not to pronounce _h_, a mark of imperfect education or humble
social standing. [See ASPIRE.]

ASPIRE, as-p[=i]r' (followed by _to_ or _after_ with the object, or by an
infinitive), _v.i._ to desire eagerly: to aim at high things: to tower
up.--_n._ ASPIR[=A]'TION, eager desire.--_adj._ ASP[=I]R'ING.--_adv._
ASP[=I]R'INGLY.--_n._ ASP[=I]R'INGNESS. [Fr.--L. _aspir[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _spir[=a]re_, to breathe.]

ASPLENIUM, as-pl[=e]'ni-um, _n._ spleenwort, a genus of ferns, mostly
tropical, with long or linear _sori_, with _indusium_ arising laterally
from above a vein--including the lady-fern, black maiden-hair, &c. [Gr.
_aspl[=e]nion_.]

ASPORT, as-p[=o]rt', _v.t._ (_rare_) to carry away, esp. in a bad
sense.--_n._ ASPORT[=A]'TION, feloniously carrying away. [L.
_asport[=a]re_--_abs_, away, and _port[=a]re_, to carry.]

ASPOUT, a-spowt', _adv. phrase_, spouting.

ASPRAWL, a-sprawl', _adv. phrase_, sprawling.

ASPREAD, a-spred', _adv. phrase_, spread out.

ASPROUT, a-sprowt', _adv. phrase_, sprouting.

ASQUAT, a-skwät', _adv. phrase_, squatting.

ASQUINT, a-skwint', _adv._ and _adj._ towards the corner of the eye:
obliquely.

ASS, as, _n._ a well-known quadruped of the horse family: (_fig._) a dull,
stupid fellow.--ASSES' BRIDGE, or PONS ASINORUM, a humorous name for the
fifth proposition of the first book of Euclid. [A.S. _assa_, the earlier
Teutonic form being _esol_, _esil_ (Goth. _asilus_)--L. _asinus_; Gr.
_onos_, ass. Perh. ult. of Semitic origin, as in Heb. _[=a]th[=o]n_, a
she-ass.]

ASSAFETIDA. Same as ASAFOETIDA.

[Illustration]

ASSAGAI, ASSEGAI, as'sa-g[=i], _n._ a slender spear of hard wood, tipped
with iron, some for hurling, some for thrusting with--used by the South
African tribes, notably the war-like Zulus.--_v.t._ to kill or slay with an
assagai. [Through Fr. or Port. from Ar. _azzagh[=a]yah_, _az_ = _al_, the
_zagh[=a]yah_, a Berber word.]

ASSAIL, as-s[=a]l', _v.t._ to assault: to attack.--_adj._
ASSAIL'ABLE.--_ns._ ASSAIL'ANT, one who assails or attacks; ASSAIL'MENT.
[O. Fr. _asaillir_--L. _assil[=i]re_--_ad_, upon, and _sal[=i]re_, to
leap.]

ASSASSIN, as-as'in, _n._ one who, usually for a reward, kills by surprise
or secretly.--_v.t._ ASSAS'SINATE, to murder by surprise or secret assault:
(_Milton_) to maltreat: also figuratively, to destroy by treacherous means,
as a reputation.--_n._ (_obs._) one who assassinates.--_ns._
ASSASSIN[=A]'TION, secret murder; ASSAS'SINATOR. [Through Fr. or It. from
Ar. _hashsh[=a]sh[=i]n_, 'hashish-eaters,' a military and religious order
in Syria, of the 11th century, who became notorious for their secret
murders in obedience to the will of their chief, and fortified themselves
for their adventures by _hashish_, an intoxicating drug or drink made from
hemp.]

ASSAULT, as-sawlt', _n._ a sudden attack: a storming, as of a town: (_Eng.
law_) unlawful attempt to apply force to the person of another--when force
is actually applied, the act amounts to _battery_: an attack of any sort by
arguments, appeals, &c.--_v.t._ to make an assault or attack upon: (_law_)
to make an assault.--_n._ ASSAULT'ER.--ASSAULT AT ARMS, a display of attack
and defence in fencing. [O. Fr. _asaut_--L. _ad_, upon, _saltus_, a leap,
_sal[=i]re_, to leap. See ASSAIL.]

ASSAY, as-s[=a]', _v.t._ to determine the proportions of a metal in an ore
or alloy: endeavour (more usually _Essay_): (_Spens._) to affect or move:
(_Shak._) to put one to the proof, as to accost with a particular purpose,
to measure swords with another, &c.: (_poet._) put to proof, examine by
trial.--_v.i._ to attempt.--_n._ the determination of the quantity of metal
in an ore or alloy: the trial of anything, as in the ancient custom of
tasting the drink before handing it to a king or noble: an attempt or
endeavour: probation or trial: (_Spens._) ascertained purity.--_ns._
ASSAY'ER, one who assays, esp. metals; ASSAY'ING, the process of assaying
or determining the proportion of pure metal in an ore or alloy;
ASSAY'-MAS'TER, the officer who determines the amount of gold or silver in
coin or bullion. [O. Fr. _assayer_, n. _assai_. See ESSAY.]

ASSEGAI, ASSEGAY. Same as ASSAGAI.

ASSEMBLE, as-sem'bl, _v.t._ to call or bring together: to collect.--_v.i._
to meet together.--_ns._ ASSEM'BLAGE, a collection of persons or things;
ASSEM'BLANCE (_Spens._), an assembling: (_Shak._) semblance:
representation; ASSEM'BLY, the act of assembling: the company so assembled:
a gathering of persons for any purpose, as for religious worship or social
entertainment: specially applied to the lower house of the legislature in
some of the United States and British colonies: (_mil._) a drum-beat, esp.
that before a march, upon which the soldiers strike their tents;
ASSEM'BLY-ROOM, a room in which persons assemble, especially for
dancing.--GENERAL ASSEMBLY, in Scotland, Ireland, and the United States,
the highest court of the Presbyterian Church; LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY, in many
of the British colonies, the title of the lower house of the legislature;
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY, the first of the revolutionary assemblies in France,
which sat 1789-91--also called the _Constituent Assembly_, superseded in
1791 by the Legislative Assembly. [Fr. _assembler_--Late L.
_assimul[=a]re_, to bring together, _ad_, to, _similis_, like. See
ASSIMILATE.]

ASSENT, as-sent', _v.i._ to think or concur with, to admit as true (with
_to_).--_n._ an agreeing or acquiescence: compliance.--_adj._
ASSENT[=A]'NEOUS, ready to agree.--_ns._ ASSENT'ER, ASSENT'OR, one of the
eight voters who indorse the proposer and seconder's nomination of a
candidate for election to the parliament of the United Kingdom.--_adjs._
ASSEN'TIENT, ASSENT'IVE.--_adv._ ASSENT'INGLY.--_n._ ASSENT'IVENESS.--ROYAL
ASSENT, in England, the sovereign's formal acquiescence in a measure which
has passed the two Houses of Parliament. [O. Fr. _asenter_, assent--L.
_assent[=a]re_, _assent[=i]re_, L. _ad_, to, _sent[=i]re_, to think.]

ASSENTATION, as-sen-t[=a]'shun, _n._ obsequious assent, adulation.--_n._
AS'SENTATOR (_obs._).--_adv._ ASSENT'ATORILY (_obs._). [L. _assent[=a]ri_,
to flatter, freq. of _assent[=i]ri_, assent, agree.]

ASSERT, as-s[.e]rt', _v.t._ to vindicate or defend by arguments or measures
(now used only of the cause as object or reflexive): to declare strongly:
to lay claim to or insist upon anything: to affirm: (_rare_) to bear
evidence of.--_adj._ ASSERT'ABLE.--_ns._ ASSERT'ER, ASSERT'OR, a champion,
one who makes a positive statement; ASSER'TION, affirmation: the act of
claiming one's rights: averment.--_adj._ ASSERT'IVE, asserting or
confirming confidently: positive: dogmatic.--_adv._ ASSERT'IVELY.--_n._
ASSERT'IVENESS.--_adj._ ASSERT'ORY, affirmative.--TO ASSERT ONE'S SELF, to
defend one's rights or opinions, sometimes with unnecessary zeal, to thrust
one's self forward. [L. _asser[)e]re_ (superl. _assertum_), _aliquem manu
in libertatem_, to lay hands on a slave in token of manumission, hence to
protect, affirm, declare--_ad_, to, and _ser[)e]re_, to join. Cf. SERIES.]

ASSESS, as-ses', _v.t._ to fix the amount of, as a tax (with _upon_): to
tax or fine: to fix the value or profits of, for taxation (with _at_): to
estimate.--_adj._ ASSESS'ABLE.--_ns._ ASSESS'MENT, act of assessing: a
valuation for the purpose of taxation: a tax; ASSESS'OR, a legal adviser
who sits beside a magistrate: one who assesses taxes: one who shares
another's dignity.--_adj._ ASSESS[=O]'RIAL.--_n._ ASSESS'ORSHIP. [Fr.--L.
_assess[=a]re_, freq. of _assid[=e]re_, _assessum_, to sit by, esp. of
judges in a court, from _ad_, to, at, _sed[=e]re_, to sit.]

ASSETS, as'sets, _n.pl._ the property of a deceased or insolvent person,
considered as chargeable for all debts, &c.: the entire property of all
sorts belonging to a merchant or to a trading association. [From the
Anglo-Fr. law phrase _aver assetz_, to have sufficient, O. Fr. _asez_,
enough--L. _ad_, to, _satis_, enough.]

ASSEVERATE, as-sev'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to declare solemnly--an earlier form
is ASSEV'ER.--_adv._ ASSEVERAT'INGLY.--_n._ ASSEVER[=A]'TION, any solemn
affirmation or confirmation. [L. _assever[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to,
_severus_, serious. See SEVERE.]

ASSIDUITY, as-sid-[=u]'i-ti, _n._ constant application or diligence:
(_pl._) constant attentions, as to a lady.--_adj._ ASSID'UOUS, constant or
unwearied in application: diligent.--_adv._ ASSID'UOUSLY.--_n._
ASSID'UOUSNESS. [L. _assiduitas_--_assiduus_, sitting close at--_ad_, to,
at, _sed[=e]re_, to sit.]

ASSIEGE, as-s[=e]j', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to besiege. [See SIEGE.]

ASSIENTO, as-[=e]-en'to, _n._ a word especially applied to an exclusive
contract between Spain and some foreign nation for the supply of African
slaves for its American possessions. [Sp., a seat, a seat in a court, a
treaty.]

ASSIGN, as-s[=i]n', _v.t._ to sign or mark out to one: to allot: to
appoint: to allege: to transfer: to ascribe or refer to: to suggest: to
fix, as a time: to point out exactly.--_n._ one to whom any property or
right is made over: (_pl._) appendages (_Shak._).--_adj._ ASSIGN'ABLE, that
may be assigned.--_ns._ ASSIGN[=A]'TION, an appointment to meet, used
chiefly of love-trysts, and mostly in a bad sense: (_Scots law_) the making
over of any right to another, equivalent to ASSIGNMENT; ASSIGNEE
(as-sin-[=e]'), one to whom any right or property is assigned: (_pl._) the
trustees of a sequestrated estate; ASSIGN'MENT, act of assigning: anything
assigned: the writing by which a transfer is made: (_Spens._) design.
[Fr.--L. _assign[=a]re_, to mark out--_ad_, to, _signum_, a mark or sign.]

ASSIGNAT, as-sin-yä', _n._ one of the notes (chiefly for 100 francs = £4
each) in the paper currency first issued in 1790 by the French
revolutionary government as bonds on the security of the appropriated
church lands.

ASSIMILATE, as-sim'il-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make similar or like to: to convert
into a like substance, as food in our bodies (with _to_, _with_).--_v.i._
to become like, or to be incorporated in.--_n._ ASSIM'ILABILITY
(_Coleridge_).--_adj._ ASSIM'ILABLE.--_n._ ASSIMIL[=A]'TION.--_adj._
ASSIM'IL[=A]TIVE, having the power or tendency to assimilate. [L.
_assimil[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _similis_, like.]

ASSIST, as-sist', _v.t._ to help.--_v.i._ to be present at a ceremony:
(_Shak._) to accompany.--_n._ ASSIST'ANCE, help: relief.--_adj._
ASSIST'ANT, helping or lending aid.--_n._ one who assists: a helper. [L.
_assist[)e]re_, to stand by--_ad_, to, _sist[)e]re_.]

ASSIZE, as-s[=i]z', _v.t._ to assess: to set or fix the quantity or
price.--_n._ a statute settling the weight, measure, or price of anything:
(_Scot._) a trial by jury, the jury: judgment, sentence, the Last Judgment:
(_pl._) the sessions or sittings of a court held periodically in English
counties, at which causes are tried by judges of the High Court of Justice
on circuit and a jury.--_n._ ASSIZ'ER, an officer who inspects weights and
measures. [O. Fr. _assise_, an assembly of judges, a set
rate--_asseoir_--L. _assid[=e]re_.]

ASSOCIATE, as-s[=o]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to join with, as a friend or partner:
to unite in the same body.--_v.i._ to keep company (_with_): to combine or
unite.--_ns._ ASSOCIABIL'ITY, ASS[=O]'CIABLENESS.--_adjs._ ASS[=O]'CIABLE,
that may be joined or associated: sociable: companionable; ASS[=O]'CIATE,
joined or connected with.--_n._ one joined or connected with another: a
companion, friend, partner, or ally.--_ns._ ASS[=O]'CIATESHIP, office of an
associate; ASSOCI[=A]'TION, act of associating: union or combination: a
society of persons joined together to promote some object.--_adj._
ASS[=O]'CI[=A]TIVE, tending to association.--ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL, the game
as formulated by the Football Association (formed in 1863).--ASSOCIATION
(OF IDEAS), applied to laws of mental combination which facilitate
recollection: similarity: contiguity, repetition. [L. _associ[=a]tum_,
_associ[=a]re_--_ad_, to _socius_, a companion.]

ASSOIL, as-soil', _v.t._ to loosen from: to absolve or acquit: to solve:
(_Spens._) to remove, to let loose, to renew, to get rid of.--_n._
ASSOIL'MENT. [Through Fr. from L.--L. _ab_, from, _solv[)e]re_, to loose.]

ASSOIL, as-soil', _v.t._ to soil, stain, or make dirty. [L. _ad_, and SOIL.
See SOIL (2).]

ASSOILZIE, as-soil'y[=e], _v.i._ to free one accused from a charge: a Scots
law term, the same as the archaic _assoil_, to absolve from sin, discharge,
pardon. See ABSOLVITOR, under ABSOLVE. [Through Fr. from L.
_absolv[)e]re_.]

ASSONANCE, as'son-ans, _n._ a correspondence in sound: in Spanish and
Portuguese poetry, a kind of rhyme, consisting in the coincidence of the
vowels of the corresponding syllables, without regard to the consonants, as
in _mate_ and _shape_, _feel_ and _need_.--_adjs._ AS'SSONANT, resembling
in sound; AS'SONANTAL, AS'SONANTIC.--_v.t._ AS'SONATE, to correspond in
sound. [Fr.--L. _asson[=a]re_, _as_ = _ad-_, to, _son[=a]re_, to sound.]

ASSORT, as-sort', _v.t._ to separate into classes: to arrange.--_v.i._ to
agree or be in accordance with: to fall into a class with, suit well with:
(_arch._) to keep company with.--_p.adj._ ASSORT'ED, classified, arranged
in sorts.--_ns._ ASSORT'EDNESS; ASSORT'MENT, act of assorting: a quantity
or number of things assorted: variety. [Fr. _assortir_--L. _ad_, to,
_sors_, a lot.]

ASSOT, as-sot', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to besot, to infatuate.--_p.adj._ ASSOT',
or ASSOT'TED (_Spens._), infatuated. [O. Fr. _asoter_--_à_, to, _sot_,
foolish. See SOT.]

ASSUAGE, as-sw[=a]j', _v.t._ to soften, mitigate, or allay.--_v.i._ to
abate or subside: to diminish.--_n._ ASSUAGE'MENT, abatement:
mitigation.--_adj._ ASSU[=A]'SIVE, softening, mild. [O. Fr., formed as if
from a L. _assuavi[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _suavis_, mild.]

ASSUBJUGATE, as-sub'j[=oo]-g[=a]t, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to reduce to
subjugation.

ASSUEFACTION, as-w[=e]-fak'shun, _n._ (_Sir T. Browne_) the act of
accustoming, habituation. [L. _assuefac[)e]re_--_assuetus_, accustomed, and
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

ASSUETUDE, as'w[=e]-t[=u]d, _n._ (_obs._) custom, habit. [L. _assuetus_.]

ASSUME, as-s[=u]m', _v.t._ to adopt, take in: to take up, to take upon
one's self: to take for granted: to arrogate: to pretend to
possess.--_v.i._ to claim unduly: to be arrogant.--_adjs._ ASSUM'ABLE,
ASSUMP'TIVE, that may be assumed.--_adv._ ASSUM'ABLY, presumably.--_adj._
ASSUMED', appropriated, usurped: pretended: taken as the basis of
argument.--_advs._ ASSUM'EDLY, ASSUM'INGLY.--_adj._ ASSUM'ING, haughty:
arrogant. [L. _assum[)e]re_--_ad_, to, _sum[)e]re_, _sumptum_, to take.]

ASSUMPSIT, a-sump'sit, _n._ an action at law, wherein the plaintiff asserts
that the defendant undertook (L. _assumpsit_) to do a certain act and
failed to fulfil his promise: in the United States, the most common form of
action.

ASSUMPTION, as-sum'shun, _n._ act of assuming: a supposition: the thing
supposed, a proposition: (_logic_) the minor premise in a
syllogism.--ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN, a church festival kept on the 15th of
August, based on the notion that after the death of Mary, her soul and body
were preserved from corruption and taken up to heaven by Christ and His
angels.--DEED OF ASSUMPTION (_Scots law_), a deed executed by trustees
under a trust-deed assuming a new trustee or settlement. [L. See ASSUME.]

ASSURE, a-sh[=oo]r', _v.t._ to make sure or secure: to give confidence:
(_Shak._) to betroth: to tell positively: to insure.--_adj._
ASSUR'ABLE.--_n._ ASSUR'ANCE, confidence: feeling of certainty:
self-reliance: impudence: positive declaration: insurance, as applied to
lives: the securing of a title to property: (_theol._) subjective certainty
of one's salvation: a solemn declaration or promise, a certain proof:
surety, warrant.--_adj._ ASSURED', certain: without doubt: insured:
overbold.--_adv._ ASSUR'EDLY.--_ns._ ASSUR'EDNESS; ASSUR'ER, one who gives
assurance: an insurer or underwriter: one who insures his life. [O. Fr.
_aseürer_ (Fr. _assurer_)--Late L. _adsecur[=a]re_--_ad_, to, _securus_,
safe. See SURE.]

ASSURGENT, as-ur'jent, _adj._ rising, ascending: (_bot._) rising in a curve
to an erect position: (_her._) of a bearing depicted as rising from the
sea.--_n._ ASSUR'GENCY, the tendency to rise.

ASSWAGE. A form of ASSUAGE.

ASSYRIAN, as-sir'i-an, _adj._ belonging to Assyria.--_n._ an inhabitant of
Assyria: the language of Assyria.--_ns._ ASSYRIOL'OGIST; ASSYRIOL'OGY, the
science of Assyrian antiquities. [Gr. _Assurios_--_Assuria_, Assyria.]

ASTARE, a-st[=a]r', _adv. phrase_, staring.

ASTART, a-start', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to start up suddenly: to happen, fall
out.--_adv._ with a start, suddenly. [Pfx. _a-_, and START.]

ASTATIC, a-stat'ik, _adj._ having a tendency not to stand still: losing
polarity, as a magnetic needle. [Gr. neg., _astatos_--_a_, neg., _statos_,
verb. adj. of _histanai_, to stand.]

ASTAY, a-st[=a]', _adv._ applied to an anchor when, in lifting it, the
cable forms such an angle with the surface of the water as to appear in a
line with the stays of the ship. [Prep. _a_, on, and STAY.]

ASTER, as't[.e]r, _n._ a genus of plants of the natural order Compositæ,
with showy radiated flowers varying from white to lilac-blue or purple,
mostly perennial, flowering in late summer and autumn, hence often called
in England Michaelmas or Christmas daisies.--CHINA ASTER, the best-known
and most valued of the family, brought from China to France by a missionary
in the 18th century. [Gr. _ast[=e]r_, a star.]

ASTERIAS, as-t[=e]r'i-as, _n._ a genus of Echinoderms, containing the
common five-rayed starfish. [Gr. _ast[=e]rias_, a fish--_ast[=e]r_, a
star.]

ASTERISK, as't[.e]r-isk, _n._ a star, used in printing as a reference to a
note at the bottom or on the margin of the page, and sometimes as a mark of
the omission of words, thus *.--_n._ AS'TERISM, a group or collection of
small stars: a constellation: three asterisks placed to direct attention to
a passage: a property of some minerals which show a star-shaped luminous
figure when viewed by reflected light--e.g. the asteriated sapphire. [Gr.
_asteriskos_, dim. of _aster_, a star.]

ASTERN, a-st[.e]rn', _adv._ in the stern: towards the hinder part of a
ship: behind. [Prep. _a_, and STERN.]

ASTEROID, as't[.e]r-oid, _n._ one of the minor planetary bodies revolving
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter.--_adj._ ASTEROID'AL. [Gr.
_ast[=e]r_, a star, _eidos_, form.]

ASTERT, a-st[.e]rt'. Same as ASTART.

ASTHENIA, as-th[=e]-n[=i]'a, _n._ debility, lack of strength.--_adj._
ASTHEN'IC [Gr. _a_, priv., and _sthenos_, strength.]

ASTHMA, ast'ma, _n._ a chronic disorder of the organs of respiration,
characterised by the occurrence of paroxysms in which the breathing becomes
difficult, and accompanied by wheezing and a distressing feeling of
tightness in the chest.--_adjs._ ASTHMAT'IC, -AL, pertaining to or affected
by asthma.--_adv._ ASTHMAT'ICALLY. [Gr. _asthma_, _asthmat-os_--_az-ein_,
to breathe hard, _a-ein_, to blow.]

ASTIGMATISM, a-stig'ma-tizm, _n._ a defective condition of the eye, in
which rays proceeding to the eye from one point are not correctly brought
to a focus at _one_ point.--_adj._ ASTIGMAT'IC. [Gr. _a_, neg., and
_stigma_, _stigmat-os_, a point.]

ASTIR, a-stir', _prep. phr._ or _adv._ on the move, out of bed, in motion
or excitement. [Prep. _a_, and STIR.]

ASTOMATOUS, as-tom'a-tus, _adj._ having no mouth, used of a division of the
protozoa.

ASTONISH, as-ton'ish, _v.t._ to impress with sudden surprise or wonder: to
amaze: (_Shak._) to stun--older form ASTON'Y, whence the _p.adj._
ASTON'IED, dazed, bewildered, greatly astonished.--ASTON', ASTUN',
ASTONED', ASTUNNED', are obsolete.--_p.adj._ ASTON'ISHED, amazed: (_obs._)
stunned.--_adj._ ASTON'ISHING, very wonderful, amazing.--_adv._
ASTON'ISHINGLY.--_n._ ASTON'ISHMENT, amazement: wonder: a cause for
astonishment. [From the earlier form, _Astone_; O. Fr. _estoner_; L.
_atton[=a]re_, to strike with a thunderbolt.]

ASTOUND, as-townd', _v.t._ to amaze, to strike dumb with
astonishment:--_pa.p._ astound'ed; _pr.p._ astound'ing.--_pa.p._ ASTOUND'
(_arch._).--_p.adj._ ASTOUND'ING. [ASTOUND (adj.) is developed from
ASTONED, hence the verb is a doublet of ASTONISH.]

ASTRADDLE, a-strad'dl, _adv._ sitting astride. [Prep. _a_, on, and
STRADDLE.]

[Illustration]

ASTRAGAL, as'tra-gal, _n._ (_archit._) a small semicircular moulding or
bead encircling a column: a round moulding near the mouth of a cannon: the
bars which hold the panes of a window. [Gr. _astragalos_, one of the
vertebræ, a moulding.]

ASTRAGALUS, as-trag'al-us, _n._ a bone of the foot, forming with the
leg-bones the hinge of the ankle-joint, by a convex upper surface and
smooth sides. [Gr.]

ASTRAKHAN, as'tra-kan, _n._ name given to lamb-skins with a curled wool
obtained from _Astrakhan_ on the Caspian Sea: a rough fabric made in
imitation of it.

ASTRAL, as'tral, _adj._ belonging to the stars: starry: in the science of
Theosophy, descriptive of a supersensible substance supposed to pervade all
space and enter into all bodies.--ASTRAL BODY, a living form composed of
astral fluid, a ghost or wraith; ASTRAL SPIRITS, pervading spirits supposed
to animate the heavenly bodies, forming, as it were, their souls--among the
most potent of demoniacal spirits in medieval demonology. [L. _astralis_,
_astrum_, a star.]

ASTRAND, a-strand', _adv._ stranded. [Prep. _a_, on, and STRAND.]

ASTRAY, a-str[=a]', _adv._ out of the right way. [Prep. _a_, on, and
STRAY.]

ASTRICTION, as-trik'shun, _n._ a binding or contraction:
restriction.--_v.t._ ASTRICT', to bind, restrict. [L. _astriction-em_,
_astring[)e]re_. See ASTRINGENT.]

ASTRIDE, a-str[=i]d', _adv._ with the legs apart, or across. [Prep. _a_,
on, and STRIDE.]

ASTRINGENT, as-trin'jent, _adj._ binding: contracting: strengthening.--_n._
a medicine that causes costiveness.--_v.t._ ASTRINGE', to bind together: to
draw tight: hence to render constipated.--_n._ ASTRIN'GENCY.--_adv._
ASTRIN'GENTLY. [L. _astringent-em_, _astring[)e]re_--_ad_, to,
_string[)e]re_, to bind.]

ASTROLABE, as'tr[=o]-l[=a]b, _n._ an instrument for measuring the altitudes
of the sun or stars, now superseded by Hadley's quadrant and sextant. [Gr.;
_astron_, a star, _labb-_, _lambano_, I take.]

ASTROLATRY, as-trol'a-tri, _n._ the worship of the stars. [Gr. _astron_, a
star, _latreia_, worship.]

ASTROLOGY, as-trol'o-ji, _n._ the infant stage of the science of the stars,
out of which grew _Astronomy_; it was occupied chiefly in determining from
the positions and motions of the heavenly bodies their supposed influence
on human and terrestrial affairs.--_n._ ASTROL'OGER, one versed in
astrology.--_adjs._ ASTROLOG'IC, -AL.--_adv._ ASTROLOG'ICALLY. [Gr.
_astrologia_--_astron_, star, _logos_, knowledge.]

ASTRONOMY, as-tron'om-i, _n._ the laws or science of the stars or heavenly
bodies.--_n._ ASTRON'OMER, one versed in astronomy.--_adj._
ASTRONOM'IC.--_adv._ ASTRONOM'ICALLY.--_v.t._ ASTRON'OMISE. [Gr.
_astronomia_--_astron_, star, _nomos_, a law.]

ASTROPHEL, as'tro-fel, _n._ a name applied by Spenser to some kind of
bitter herb.

ASTRUT, a-strut', _adv._ in a strutting manner. [Prep. _a_, on, and STRUT.]

ASTUTE, ast-[=u]t', _adj._ crafty: cunning: shrewd: sagacious.--_adv._
ASTUTE'LY.--_n._ ASTUTE'NESS.--The _adj._ AST[=U]'CIOUS, _adv._
AST[=U]'CIOUSLY, and _n._ AST[=U]'CITY are all _rare_. [L.
_astutus_--_astus_, crafty, akin perhaps to ACUTE.]

ASTYLAR, a-st[=i]'lar, _adj._ without columns. [Gr. _a_, neg., _stylos_, a
column.]

ASUDDEN, a-sud'en, _adv._ suddenly. [Prep. _a_, and SUDDEN.]

ASUNDER, a-sun'd[.e]r, _adv._ apart: into parts: separately. [Prep. _a_,
and SUNDER.]

ASWARM, a-swärm', _adv._ swarming. [Prep. _a_, and SWARM.]

ASWAY, a-sw[=a]', _adv._ swaying.

ASWIM, a-swim', _adv._ afloat.

ASWING, a-swing', _adv._ swinging.

ASWOON, a-sw[=oo]n', _adv._ in a swoon.

ASYLUM, a-s[=i]l'um, _n._ a place of refuge for debtors and for such as
were accused of some crime: an institution for the care or relief of the
unfortunate, such as the blind or insane: any place of refuge or
protection. [L.--Gr. _asylon_--_a_, neg., _syl[=e]_, right of seizure.]

ASYMMETRY, a-sim'e-tri, _n._ want of symmetry or proportion between
parts.--_adjs._ ASYMMET'RIC, -AL.--_adv._ ASYMMET'RICALLY. [Gr. See
SYMMETRY.]

ASYMPTOTE, a'sim-t[=o]t, _n._ (_math._) a line that continually approaches
nearer to some curve without ever meeting it.--_adjs._ ASYMPTOT'IC,
-AL.--_adv._ ASYMPTOT'ICALLY. [Gr. _asympt[=o]tos_, not coinciding--_a_,
not, _syn_, with, _pt[=o]tos_, apt to fall, _pipt-ein_, to fall.]

ASYNARTETE, a-sin'ar-t[=e]t, _adj._ and _n._ not connected, consisting of
two members having different rhythms; a verse of such a kind.--Also
ASYN'ARTETIC. [Gr.; _a_, neg., _syn_, together, _arta-ein_, to knit.]

ASYNCHRONISM, a-sin'kro-nizm, _n._ want of synchronism or correspondence in
time.--_adj._ ASYN'CHRONOUS.

ASYNDETON, a-sin'de-ton, _n._ (_rhet._) a figure in which the conjunctions
are omitted, as in Matt. x. 8.--_adj._ ASYNDET'IC. [Gr.; _a_, neg.,
_syndetos_, bound together, _syn_, together, _dein_, to bind.]

ASYNTACTIC, as-in-tak'tik, _adj._ loosely put together, irregular,
ungrammatical. [Gr.; _a_, neg., _syntaktos_, _syntass-ein_, to put in order
together.]

ASYSTOLE, a-sis'to-l[=e], _n._ (_med._) the condition of a heart the left
ventricle of which is unable to empty itself.--Also ASYS'TOLISM. [Made up
of Gr. _a_, neg., _systol[=e]_, contraction.]

AT, at, _prep._ denoting presence, nearness, or relation. Often used
elliptically, as in 'At him, good dog.' [A.S. _æt_; cog. with Goth, and
Ice. _at_, L. _ad_; Sans. _adhi_, on.]

ATABAL, at'a-bal, _n._ a Moorish kettledrum. [Sp.--Ar. _at-tabl_, the
drum.]

ATAGHAN. Same as YATAGHAN.

ATAVISM, at'av-izm, _n._ frequent appearance of ancestral, but not
parental, characteristics in an animal or plant: reversion to an original
type.--_adj._ AT'AVISTIC. [L. _atavus_--_avus_, a grandfather.]

ATAXIA, at-ak'si-a, ATAXY, a-tax'i, or at'ax-i, _n._ (_med._) irregularity
of the functions of the body through disease, esp. inability to co-ordinate
voluntary movements, as in _locomotor ataxy_. [Gr.; _a_, neg., _taktos_,
_tassein_, to arrange.]

ATE, et, or [=a]t, _pa.t._ of EAT.

ATE, [=a]'t[=e], _n._ (_myth._) the goddess of mischief and of all rash
actions and their results. [Gr.]

ATELIER, at-el-y[=a]', _n._ a workshop, esp. an artist's studio. [Fr.]

ATHANASIA, ath-a-n[=a]'si-a, _n._ deathlessness.--Also ATHAN'ASY. [Gr.;
_athanatos_, _a_, neg., _thanatos_, death.]

ATHANASIAN, ath-a-n[=a]z'yan, _adj._ relating to _Athanasius_ (296-373), or
to the creed erroneously attributed to him.

ATHANOR, ath'a-nor, _n._ a self-feeding digesting furnace, used by the
alchemists, in which a uniform heat was maintained. [Ar. _at-tannur_, _at_
= _al_, the _n[=u]r_, fire.]

ATHEISM, [=a]'the-izm, _n._ disbelief in the existence of God.--_v.i._ and
_v.t._ A'THEISE, to talk or write as an atheist.--_n._ A'THEIST, one who
disbelieves in the existence of God.--_adjs._ ATHEIST'IC, -AL.--_adv._
ATHEIST'ICALLY.--_adj._ A'THEOUS (_Milton_), atheistic. [Fr.
_athéisme_--Gr. _a_, neg., and _theos_, God.]

ATHELING, ath'el-ing, _n._ a member of a noble family, latterly a prince of
the blood royal, or the heir-apparent. [A.S. _ætheling_; Ger. _adel_.]

ATHENÆUM, ATHENEUM, ath-e-n[=e]'um, _n._ a temple of Ath[=e]na or Minerva
at Athens, in which scholars and poets read their works: a public
institution for lectures, reading, &c. [Gr. _Ath[=e]naion_--_Ath[=e]na_ or
_Ath[=e]n[=e]_, the goddess Minerva.]

ATHENIAN, a-th[=e]'ni-an, _adj._ relating to Athens, the capital of
Greece.--_n._ a native of Athens.

ATHEOLOGY, a-th[=e]-ol'oj-i, _n._ opposition to theology.--_adj._
ATHEOLOG'ICAL. [Gr. _atheos_, without God, _logia_, discourse.]

ATHERINE, ath'er-[=i]n, _n._ a genus of small fishes, allied to the Gray
Mullet family, abundant in the Mediterranean--one species (_Atherina
presbyter_), found on the south coast of England, is often sold as a smelt.
[Gr.]

ATHERMANCY, ath-er'man-si, _n._ the property of stopping radiant
heat.--_adj._ ATHER'MANOUS. [Gr. _a_, neg., _thermain-ein_, to heat.]

ATHEROMA, ath'er-[=o]-ma, _n._ a name formerly applied to cysts on the
scalp, with contents of the consistence of porridge, but now only used of a
common form of inflammation of arteries.--_adj._ ATHEROM'ATOUS. [Gr.;
_athar[=e]_, porridge.]

ATHIRST, a-th[.e]rst', _adj._ thirsty: eager for. [A.S. _of thyrst_. See
THIRST.]

ATHLETE, ath'l[=e]t, _n._ a contender for victory in feats of strength: one
vigorous in body or mind. The form ATHL[=E]'TA survived till the later half
of the 18th century.--_adj._ ATHLET'IC, relating to athletics: strong,
vigorous.--_adv._ ATHLET'ICALLY.--_n._ ATHLETICISM (ath-let'i-sizm), the
act of engaging in athletic exercises: devotion to athletics.--_n.pl._
ATHLET'ICS, the art of wrestling, running, &c.: athletic sports. [Gr.
_athl[=e]t[=e]s_--_athlos_, contest.]

ATHRILL, a-thril', _adv._ thrilling.

ATHROB, a-throb', _adv._ throbbing.

ATHWART, a-thwawrt', _prep._ across.--_adv._ sidewise: wrongly:
perplexingly. [Prep. _a_, on, and THWART.]

ATILT, a-tilt', _adv._ on tilt: as a tilter.

ATIMY, at'i-mi, _n._ loss of honour: in ancient Athens, loss of civil
rights, public disgrace. [Gr. _atimia_--_a_, neg., _tim[=e]_, honour.]

ATKINS. See TOMMY ATKINS.

ATLANTEAN, at-lan-t[=e]'an, _adj._ relating to or like _Atlas_, gigantic:
also relating to ATLAN'TIS, according to ancient tradition, a vast island
in the Atlantic Ocean, or to Bacon's ideal commonwealth of that name. [See
ATLAS.]

ATLANTES, at-lan't[=e]z, _n.pl._ figures of men used instead of columns.
[From ATLAS.]

ATLANTIC, at-lan'tik, _adj._ pertaining to Atlas, or to the Atlantic
Ocean.--_n._ the ocean between Europe, Africa, and America. [From Mount
_Atlas_, in the north-west of Africa, named from the Titan, Atlas.]

ATLAS, at'las, _n._ that piece of the human vertebral column which
articulates with the skull, so called because it supports the head: a
collection of maps. [Gr. _Atlas_, _Atlantis_, a Titan who bore the world on
his shoulders, and whose figure used to be given on the title-page of
atlases.]

ATLAS, at'las, _n._ a kind of silk-satin manufactured in the East. [Ar.]

ATMOLOGY, at-mol'o-ji, _n._ the science of the phenomena of aqueous
vapour.--_n._ ATMOL'OGIST. [Gr. _atmos_, vapour, and _logia_,
discourse--_legein_, to speak.]

ATMOLYSIS, at-mol'i-sis, _n._ a method of separating a mixture of gases by
taking advantage of their different rates of passage through a porous
septum. [Gr. _atmos_, vapour, and _lysis_, loosing--_lyein_, to loose.]

ATMOMETER, at-mom'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the rate of
evaporation from a moist surface. [Gr. _atmos_, vapour, and METER.]

ATMOSPHERE, at'mo-sf[=e]r, _n._ the gaseous envelope that surrounds the
earth or any of the heavenly bodies: any gaseous medium: a conventional
unit of atmospheric pressure: (_fig._) any surrounding influence.--_adjs._
ATMOSPHER'IC, -AL, of or depending on the atmosphere.--_adv._
ATMOSPHER'ICALLY.--ATMOSPHERIC ENGINE, a variety of steam-engine in which
the steam is admitted only to the under side of the piston; ATMOSPHERIC
HAMMER, a hammer driven by means of compressed air; ATMOSPHERIC RAILWAY, a
railway where the motive-power is derived from the pressure of the
atmosphere acting on a piston working in an iron tube of uniform bore. [Gr.
_atmos_, air, _sphaira_, a sphere.]

ATOLL, a-tol', or at'ol, _n._ a coral island consisting of a circular belt
of coral enclosing a central lagoon. [A Malay word.]

ATOM, at'om, _n._ a particle of matter so small that it cannot be cut or
divided, the unit of matter; anything very small.--_adjs._ ATOM'IC, -AL,
pertaining to atoms.--_ns._ ATOMIC'ITY; ATOMIS[=A]'TION (_med._) the
reduction of liquids to the form of spray; AT'OMISM, the doctrine that
atoms arranged themselves into the universe: the atomic theory; AT'OMIST,
one who believes in atomism.--_adj._ ATOMIS'TIC.--_adv._
ATOMIST'ICALLY.--_n._ AT'OMY, an atom, or mote: (_Shak._) a pygmy.--ATOMIC
PHILOSOPHY, a system of philosophy enunciated by Democritus, which taught
that the ultimate constituents of all things are indivisible particles,
differing in form and in their relations to each other; ATOMIC THEORY, the
hypothesis that all chemical combinations take place between the ultimate
particles of bodies, uniting each atom to atom, or in proportions expressed
by some simple multiple of the number of atoms. [Gr. _atomos_--_a_, not,
_temnein_, _tamein_, to cut. See ATOM.]

ATOMY, at'om-i, _n._ (_Shak._) a skeleton, walking skeleton. [Formerly also
_atamy_ and _natomy_, for _anatomy_, mistakingly divided _an atomy_.]

ATONE, at-[=o]n', _adv._ (_Spens._) at one, at once, together. [M.E. also
_attone_, earlier _atoon_, _aton_, _at one_, _at on_.]

ATONE, at-[=o]n', _v.i._ to give satisfaction or make reparation (with
_for_): to make up for deficiencies: (_Shak._) to agree, be in
accordance.--_v.t._ to appease, to expiate: (_arch._) harmonise, or
reconcile.--_ns._ ATONE'MENT, the act of atoning; reconciliation:
expiation: reparation: esp. (_theol._) the reconciliation of God and man by
means of the incarnation and death of Christ; ATON'ER.--_adv._ ATON'INGLY.
[See ATONE, above.]

ATONY, at'on-i, _n._ want of tone or energy: debility: relaxation.--_adj._
AT'ONIC (_pros._), without tone: unaccented. [Gr. _atonia_--_a_, neg.,
_tonos_, tone, strength. See TONE.]

ATOP, a-top', _adv._ on or at the top. [Prep. _a_, and TOP.]

ATRABILIAR, at-ra-bil'i-ar, _adj._ of a melancholy temperament:
hypochondriac: splenetic, acrimonious.--Also ATRABIL'IARY, ATRABIL'IOUS.
[L. _ater_, _atra_, black, _bilis_, gall, bile. See BILE.]

ATRAMENTAL, at-ra-men'tal, _adj._ (_Sir T. Browne_) inky, black. [From L.
_atramentum_, ink--_atra_, black.]

ATREMBLE, a-trem'bl, _adv._ trembling.

ATRIP, a-trip', _adv._ said of an anchor when it is just drawn out of the
ground in a perpendicular direction--of a sail, when it is hoisted from the
cap, sheeted home, and ready for trimming. [Prep. _a_, on, and TRIP.]

ATRIUM, [=a]'tri-um, _n._ the entrance-hall or chief apartment of a Roman
house. [Prob. orig. the kitchen, and so lit. 'the apartment blackened with
smoke'--L. _ater_, black; others connect the word with _ædes_, orig. a
fireplace, then a house, a temple.]

ATROCIOUS, a-tr[=o]'shus, _adj._ extremely cruel or wicked: heinous: very
grievous: execrable.--_adv._ ATR[=O]'CIOUSLY.--_ns._ ATR[=O]'CIOUSNESS;
ATROC'ITY, atrociousness: an atrocious act. [L. _atrox_, _atrocis_,
cruel--_ater_, black.]

ATROPAL, at'ro-pal, _adj._ (_bot._) not inverted. [Gr. _atropos_--_a_,
neg., and _trepein_, to turn.]

ATROPHY, a'trof-i, _n._ an alteration of the vital processes in a living
organism, either animal or vegetable, resulting in a diminution of size and
functional activity of the whole organism (_general atrophy_), or of
certain of its organs or tissues: emaciation.--_adjs._ ATROPH'IC,
AT'ROPHIED. [Gr. _a_, neg., and _troph[=e]_, nourishment.]

ATROPIA, a-tr[=o]'pi-a, ATROPIN, ATROPINE, at'ro-pin, _n._ a poisonous
alkaloid existing in the deadly nightshade.--_n._ AT'ROPISM, poisoning by
atropin. [From Gr. _Atropos_, one of the _Fates_, who cuts the thread of
life.]

ATTACH, at-tach', _v.t._ to bind or fasten: to seize: to gain over: to
connect, associate: to join to in action or function: (_Shak._) to
arrest.--_v.i._ to adhere, to be fastened upon: (_rare_) to come into
effect.--_adj._ ATTACH'ABLE.--_p.adj._ ATTACHED', fastened, fixed, joined
by taste or affection (with _to_), fond, devoted to.--_n._ ATTACH'MENT, a
bond of fidelity or affection: the seizure of any one's goods or person by
virtue of a legal process. [O. Fr. _atachier_, from _à_ (--L. _ad_), and
the root of TACK (q.v.).]

ATTACHÉ, a-ta'sh[=a], _n._ a young diplomatist attached to the suite of an
ambassador. [Participle of Fr. _attacher_, to attach.]

ATTACK, at-tak', _v.t._ to fall upon violently: to assault: to assail with
unfriendly words or writing: to begin to affect, fall upon (of
diseases).--_n._ an assault or onset: the offensive part in any contest:
the beginning of active operations on anything, even dinner: severe
criticism or calumny.--_adj._ ATTACK'ABLE. [Fr. _attaquer_. See ATTACH, of
which it is a doublet.]

ATTAIN, at-t[=a]n', _v.t._ to reach or gain by effort: to obtain: to reach
a place: to reach.--_v.i._ to come or arrive: to reach.--_adj._
ATTAIN'ABLE, that may be reached.--_ns._ ATTAIN'ABLENESS, ATTAINABIL'ITY;
ATTAIN'MENT, act of attaining: the thing attained: acquisition: (_pl._)
acquirements in learning. [O. Fr. _ataindre_--L. _atting-[)e]re_--_ad_, to,
_tang-[)e]re_, to touch.]

ATTAINDER, at-t[=a]n'd[.e]r, _n._ act of attainting: (_law_) loss of civil
rights through conviction for high-treason.--_v.t._ ATTAINT', to convict:
to deprive of rights for being convicted of treason: to accuse of:
disgrace, stain (from a fancied connection with _taint_).--_n._ (_arch._)
the act of touching, a hit (in tilting): (_Shak._) infection: attainder: a
stain, disgrace.--Older _pa.p._ ATTAINT'--(_Shak._) corrupted,
tainted.--_ns._ ATTAINT'MENT, ATTAINT'URE, state of being attainted. [O.
Fr. _ataindre_--L. _atting-[)e]re_. See ATTAIN.]

ATTAR, at'ar, _n._ a very fragrant essential oil made in Turkey and other
Eastern lands, chiefly from the damask rose.--Also OTTO. [Pers. _atar_.]

ATTASK, at-task', _v.t._ to task. [Pfx. _a-_, and TASK.]

ATTEMPER, at-tem'p[.e]r, _v.t._ to mix in due proportion: to modify or
moderate: to adapt.--_p.adj._ ATTEM'PERED, tempered, mild, regulated. [O.
Fr. _atemprer_--L. _attemper[=a]re_--_ad_, to, and _temper[=a]re_. See
TEMPER.]

ATTEMPT, at-temt', _v.t._ to try or endeavour: to try to obtain: tempt,
entice: to make an effort or attack upon.--_v.i._ to make an attempt or
trial.--_n._ a trial: endeavour or effort: a personal assault: (_Milton_)
temptation: (_law_) any act which can fairly be described as one of a
series which, if uninterrupted and successful, would constitute a
crime.--_n._ ATTEMPTABIL'ITY.--_adj._ ATTEMPT'ABLE, that may be
attempted.--_n._ ATTEMPT'ER (_Milton_), a tempter. [O. Fr. _atempter_--L.
_attent[=a]re_--_ad_, and _tem-pt_, _tent[=a]re_, to try--_tend[)e]re_, to
stretch.]

ATTEND, at-tend', _v.t._ to wait on or accompany: to be present at: to wait
for: to give attention (with _to_).--_v.i._ to yield attention: to act as
an attendant: to wait, be consequent (with _to_, _on_, _upon_).--_ns._
ATTEND'ANCE, act of attending: (_B_.) attention, careful regard: presence:
the persons attending; ATTEND'ANCY (_obs._), attendance, a retinue:
(_obs._) relative position.--_adj._ ATTEND'ANT, giving attendance:
accompanying.--_n._ one who attends or accompanies: a servant: what
accompanies or follows: (_law_) one who owes a duty or service to
another.--_ns._ ATTEND'ER, one who gives heed: a companion:--_fem._
ATTEN'DRESS; ATTEND'MENT (_Sir T. Browne_), attention.--_adj._ ATTENT'
(_Spens._), giving attention.--_n._ (_Spens._) attention.--IN ATTENDANCE
ON, waiting upon, attending. [O. Fr. _atendre_--L. _attend[)e]re_--_ad_,
to, _tend[)e]re_, to stretch.]

ATTENTION, at-ten'shun, _n._ act of attending, as in to pay, give, call, or
attract attention: steady application of the mind: heed: civility,
courtesy: care.--_interj._ (_mil._) a cautionary word used as a command to
execute some manoeuvre.--_adj._ ATTENT'IVE, full of attention: courteous,
mindful.--_adv._ ATTENT'IVELY.--_n._ ATTENTI'VENESS. [L.
_attention-em_--_attend-[)e]re_. See ATTEND.]

ATTENUATE, at-ten'[=u]-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make thin or lean: to break down
into finer parts: to reduce in density: reduce in strength or value,
simplify.--_v.i._ to become thin or fine: to grow less.--_n._ ATTEN'UANT,
anything possessing this property.--_adjs._ ATTEN'UATE, ATTEN'UATED, made
thin or slender: dilute, rarefied:--_n._ ATTENU[=A]'TION, process of making
slender: reduction of intensity, density, or force: specially in
homeopathy, the reduction of the active principles of medicines to minute
doses. [L. _attenu[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_ad_, to, _tenuis_, thin.]

ATTEST, at-test', _v.t._ to testify or bear witness to: to affirm by
signature or oath: to give proof of, to manifest: (_obs._) to call to
witness.--_v.i._ to bear witness.--_n._ (_Shak._) witness,
testimony.--_adjs._ ATTEST'ABLE, ATTEST'ATIVE.--_ns._ ATTEST[=A]'TION, act
of attesting: administration of an oath; ATTEST'OR, ATTEST'ER, one who
attests or vouches for. [L. _attest[=a]ri_, _ad_, to, _testis_, a witness.]

ATTIC, at'ik, _adj._ pertaining to Attica or to Athens: chaste, refined,
elegant like the Athenians.--_v.t._ ATT'ICISE, to make conformable to the
language or idiom of Attica.--_v.i._ to use the idioms of the Athenians: to
side with the Athenians, to affect Attic or Greek style or manners.--_n._
AT'TICISM.--ATTIC SALT, wit of a dry, delicate, and refined quality. [Gr.
_Attikos_, Attic, Athenian, _Attik[=e]_, Attica, perh. from _akt[=e]_,
headland, though connected by some with _astu_, city.]

ATTIC, at'ik, _n._ (_archit._) a low story above the cornice that
terminates the main part of an elevation: a room in the roof of a house.
[Introduced in architecture from the idea that the feature to which it
alluded was constructed in the Athenian manner.]

ATTIRE, at-t[=i]r', _v.t._ to dress, array, or adorn: to prepare.--_n._
dress: any kind of covering, even the plants that clothe the soil:
(_Shak._) a dress or costume.--_ns._ ATTIRE'MENT, ATTIR'ING. [O. Fr.
_atirer_, put in order--_à tire_, in a row--_à_ (L. _ad_), to, and _tire_,
_tiere_, order, dress. See TIER.]

ATTITUDE, at'ti-t[=u]d, _n._ posture, or position: gesture: any condition
of things or relation of persons viewed as expressing some thought,
feeling, &c.--_adj._ ATTITUD'INAL.--_n._ ATTITUDIN[=A]'RIAN, one who
studies attitudes.--_v.i._ ATTITUD'INISE, to assume affected
attitudes.--_n._ ATTITUDIN[=I]'SER.--TO STRIKE AN ATTITUDE, to assume a
position or figure to indicate a feeling or emotion not really felt. [Fr.
or It. from L. _aptitudin-em_, _aptus_, fit.]

ATTOLLENT, at-tol'lent, _adj._ lifting up, raising.--_n._ a muscle with
this function. [L. _attollens_, _-entis_, pr.p. of _attoll[)e]re_, to lift
up--_ad_, to, _toll[)e]re_, to lift.]

ATTORNEY, at-tur'ni, _n._ one legally authorised to act for another--hence
the sense of the phrases 'in person' and 'by attorney:' one legally
qualified to manage cases in a court of law: a solicitor--a solicitor or
attorney prepares cases and does general law business, while a barrister
pleads before the courts: (_pl._) ATTOR'NEYS.--_v.t._ ATTOR'NEY (_Shak._),
to perform by proxy, to employ as a proxy.--_ns._ ATTOR'NEY-GEN'ERAL, the
first ministerial law-officer of the Crown in England and Ireland: the
title of the king's attorney in the duchies of Lancaster and Cornwall, and
the county palatine of Durham: in the United States, one of the seven
officials who constitute the president's cabinet, the head of the
department of Justice; ATTOR'NEYSHIP, ATTOR'NEYISM,
ATTOR'NEYDOM.--ATTORNEY-AT-LAW, or PUBLIC ATTORNEY, a professional and duly
qualified legal agent; ATTORNEY IN FACT, or PRIVATE ATTORNEY, one duly
appointed by _letter_ or _power of attorney_ to act for another in matters
of contract, money payments, and the like.--LETTER WARRANT, or POWER OF
ATTORNEY, the formal instrument by one person authorising another to
perform certain acts for him. [O. Fr. _atorne_--Low L.
_attornatus_--_atorn[=a]re_, to commit business to another. See TURN.]

ATTRACT, at-trakt', _v.t._ to draw to or cause to approach: to allure: to
entice: to draw forth.--_adj._ ATTRACT'ABLE, that may be attracted.--_n._
ATTRAC'TION, act of attracting: the force which draws or tends to draw
bodies or their particles to each other: that which attracts.--_adj._
ATTRACT'IVE, having the power of attracting: alluring.--_advs._
ATTRACT'IVELY, ATTRACT'INGLY.--_ns._ ATTRACT'IVENESS, ATTRACTABIL'ITY;
ATTRACT'OR, ATTRACT'ER, an agent of attraction. [L. _attrah[)e]re_,
_attractus_--_ad_, to, _trah[)e]re_, to draw.]

ATTRAHENT, at'tra-hent, _adj._ attracting or drawing.--_n._ that which
attracts. [L. _attrahens_, _-entis_, pr.p. of _attrah[)e]re_. See ATTRACT.]

ATTRAP, at-trap', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to adorn with trappings: to dress or
array. [L. _ad_, to, and TRAP.]

ATTRIBUTE, at-trib'[=u]t, _v.t._ to ascribe, assign, or consider as
belonging.--_adj._ ATTRIB'UTABLE.--_ns._ AT'TRIBUTE, that which is
attributed: that which is inherent in, or inseparable from, anything: that
which can be predicated of anything: a quality or property;
ATTRIB[=U]'TION, act of attributing: that which is attributed:
commendation.--_adj._ ATTRIB'UTIVE, expressing an attribute.--_n._ a word
denoting an attribute. [L. _attribu[)e]re_, -_tributum_--_ad_, to,
_tribu_-_[)e]re_, to give.]

ATTRIST, at-trist', _v.t._ (_obs._) to sadden. [Fr.--L. _ad_, to,
_tristis_, sad.]

ATTRITE, at-tr[=i]t', _adj._ worn by rubbing or friction: (_theol._)
repentant through fear of punishment, not yet from the love of God.--_n._
ATTRI'TION, the rubbing of one thing against another: a wearing by
friction: (_theol._) a defective or imperfect sorrow for sin. [L.
_attritus_--_atter_-_[)e]re_--_ad_, and _ter[)e]re_, _tritum_, to rub.]

ATTUNE, at-t[=u]n', _v.t._ to put in tune: to make one sound accord with
another: to arrange fitly: to make musical.--_n._ ATTUNE'MENT. [L. _ad_,
to, and TUNE.]

ATWAIN, a-tw[=a]n', _adv._ in twain: (_arch._) asunder. [Prep. _a_, and
TWAIN.]

ATWEEN, a-tw[=e]n', _adv._ (_Spens._) between. [Prep. _a_, and TWAIN.]

ATWIXT, a-twikst', _adv._ (_Spens._) betwixt, between. [Pfx. _a_-, and
_'twixt_, BETWIXT.]

AUBADE, [=o]-bäd', _n._ a musical announcement of dawn: a sunrise song.
[Fr. _aube_, dawn--L. _alba_, white.]

AUBERGE, [=o]-b[.e]rj', _n._ an inn.--_adj._ AUBERG'ICAL (_H.
Walpole_).--_n._ AUBERGISTE ([=o]-b[.e]rj-[=e]st'). [Fr., of Teut. origin.
See HARBOUR.]

AUBERGINE, [=o]'ber-j[=e]n, _n._ the fruit of the egg-plant, the brinjal.
[Fr. dim. of _auberge_, a kind of peach--Sp. _albérchigo_--Ar. _al_, the,
_pérsigo_--L. _persicum_, a peach.]

AUBURN, aw'burn, _adj._ reddish brown. [The old meaning was a light yellow,
or lightish hue; Low L. _alburnus_, whitish--L. _albus_, white.]

AUCTION, awk'shun, _n._ a public sale in which the bidder offers an
increase on the price offered by another, and the articles go to him who
bids highest.--_v.t._ to sell by auction.--_adj._ AUC'TIONARY.--_n._
AUCTIONEER', one who is licensed to sell by auction.--_v.t._ to sell by
auction.--DUTCH AUCTION, a kind of mock auction at which the salesman
starts at a high price, and comes down till he meets a bidder. [L.
_auction_-_em_, an increasing--_aug[=e]re_, _auctum_, to increase.]

AUCTORIAL, awk't[=o]r-i-al, _adj._ of or pertaining to an author or his
trade. [L. _auctor_.]

AUDACIOUS, aw-d[=a]'shus, _adj._ daring: bold: impudent.--_adv._
AUD[=A]'CIOUSLY.--_ns._ AUD[=A]'CIOUSNESS, AUDACITY (aw-das'i-ti). [Fr.
_audacieux_--L. _audax_--_aud[=e]re_, to dare.]

AUDIBLE, awd'i-bl, _adj._ able to be heard.--_ns._ AUD'IBLENESS,
AUDIBIL'ITY.--_adv._ AUD'IBLY.--_n._ AUD'IENCE, the act of hearing: a
judicial hearing: admittance to a hearing: a ceremonial interview: an
assembly of hearers: a court of government or justice in Spanish America,
also the territory administered by it--Sp. _audiencia_.--_adj._ AUD'IENT,
listening: paying attention.--_n._ a hearer. [L. _audibilis_--_aud[=i]re_,
to hear, conn. with Ger. _ous_, _[=o]tos_, the ear.]

AUDIOMETER, awd-i-om'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring and
recording differences in the power of hearing.

AUDIPHONE, awd'i-f[=o]n, _n._ an instrument which is pressed against the
upper front teeth, the convex side outwards, in order to communicate sounds
to the teeth and bones of the skull, thence to the organs of hearing.

AUDIT, awd'it, _n._ an examination of accounts by one or more duly
authorised persons: a calling to account generally: a statement of account:
(_obs._) a periodical settlement of accounts: (_obs._) audience,
hearing.--_v.t._ to examine and verify by reference to vouchers, &c.--_ns._
AUDI'TION, the sense of hearing: the act of hearing: (_rare_) something
heard; AUD'ITOR, a hearer: one who audits accounts:--_fem._ AUD'ITRESS;
AUDIT[=O]R'IUM, in an opera-house, public hall, or the like, the space
allotted to the hearers: the reception-room of a monastery;
AUD'ITORSHIP.--_adj._ AUD'ITORY, relating to the sense of hearing.--_n._ an
audience: a place where lectures, &c., are heard.--AUDIT ALE, an ale of
special quality brewed for some Oxford and Cambridge colleges; orig. for
use on the day of audit. [L. _auditus_, a hearing--_aud[=i]re_, to hear.
See AUDIBLE.]

AUGEAN, aw-j[=e]'an, _adj._ filthy: difficult. [From _Augeas_, a fabled
king of Elis in Greece, whose stalls, containing 3000 oxen, and uncleaned
for thirty years, were swept out by Hercules in one day by his turning the
river Alpheus through them.]

AUGER, aw'g[.e]r, _n._ a carpenter's tool used for boring holes in
wood.--_n._ AU'GER-BIT, an auger that fits into a carpenter's brace (see
BRACE). [A corr. of _nauger_, an auger, A.S. _nafugár_--_nafu_, a nave of a
wheel, _gár_, a piercer. See NAVE (of a wheel), GORE, a triangular piece.]

AUGHT, awt, _n._ a whit: ought: anything: a part. [A.S. _á-wiht_, contr. to
_áht_, whence _[=o]ht_, _[=o]ght_, and _ought_. Shakespeare, Milton, and
Pope use _ought_ and _aught_ without distinction. _Awiht_ is from _á_, _ó_,
ever, and _wiht_, creature, a wight, a thing.]

AUGITE, aw'j[=i]t, _n._ one of the Pyroxene group of minerals, closely
allied to hornblende, usually of a greenish colour, occurring crystallised
in prisms, and forming an essential component of many igneous
rocks.--_adj._ AUGIT'IC. [Gr. _aug[=e]_, brightness.]

AUGMENT, awg-ment', _v.t._ to increase: to make larger.--_v.i._ to grow
larger.--_n._ AUG'MENT, increase: (_gram._) the prefixed vowel to the past
tenses of the verb in Sanskrit and Greek. Sometimes applied also to such
inflectional prefixes as the _ge-_ of the German perfect
participle.--_adjs._ AUGMENT'ABLE, AUGMENT'ATIVE, having the quality or
power of augmenting.--_n._ (_gram._) a word formed from another to express
increase of its meaning.--_ns._ AUGMENT[=A]'TION, increase: addition:
(_her._) an additional charge in a coat-of-arms bestowed by the sovereign
as a mark of honour: (_mus._) the repetition of a melody in the course of
the piece in notes of greater length than the original: (_Scots law_) an
increase of stipend obtained by a parish minister by an action raised in
the Court of Teinds against the titular and heritors; AUGMENT'ER. [L.
_augmentum_, increase--_aug[=e]re_, to increase, Gr. _auxan-ein_.]

AUGUR, aw'gur, _n._ among the Romans, one who gained knowledge of secret or
future things by observing the flight and the cries of birds: a diviner; a
soothsayer.--_v.t._ to foretell from signs.--_v.i._ to guess or conjecture:
to forebode.--_adj._ AU'GURAL.--_ns._ AU'GURSHIP; AU'GURY, the art or
practice of auguring: an omen.--The words AU'GURATE and AUGUR[=A]'TION are
obsolete. [L.; prob. from _avis_, bird, and root, _gar_, in L.
_garr[=i]re_, to chatter, Sans. _gir_, speech.]

AUGUST, aw-gust', _adj._ venerable: imposing: sublime: majestic--_adv._
AUGUST'LY.--_n._ AUGUST'NESS. [L. _augustus_--_aug[=e]re_, to increase,
honour.]

AUGUST, aw'gust, _n._ the eighth month of the year, so called after the
Roman emperor _Augustus_ Cæsar.

AUGUSTAN, aw-gust'an, _adj._ pertaining to the Emperor Augustus, or to the
time in which he reigned (31 B.C.-14 A.D.)--the most brilliant age in Roman
literature, hence applied to any similar age, as the reign of Anne in
English, or that of Louis XIV. in French literature: classic: refined.

AUGUSTINE, aw-gust'in, AUGUSTINIAN, aw-gus-tin'i-an, _n._ one of an order
of monks who derive their name and rule from St Augustine: (_theol._) one
who holds the opinions of St Augustine, esp. on predestination and
irresistible grace.--_adj._ AUGUSTIN'IAN, of or relating to St
Augustine.--_n._ AUGUSTIN'IANISM.

AUK, awk, _n._ a genus of web-footed sea-birds, with short wings used only
as paddles, found in the northern seas. The Great Auk is supposed to have
become extinct in 1844. [Ice. _álka_.]

AULA, aw'la, _n._ a hall.--_adj._ AUL[=A]'RIAN, relating to a hall.--_n._
at Oxford, a member of a hall, as distinguished from a collegian.--AULA
REGIS, also called _Curia Regis_, a name used in English history for a
feudal assembly of tenants-in-chief, for the Privy Council, and for the
Court of King's Bench. [L. _aula_, a hall.]

AULD, awld, _adj._ (_Scot._) old.--_adjs._ AULD'-FAR'RANT (lit.
'_favouring_ the old'), old-fashioned, wise beyond their years, as of
children; AULD'-WARLD, old-world, ancient.--AULD LANGSYNE, old long since,
long ago.

AULIC, awl'ik, _adj._ pertaining to a royal court.--AULIC COUNCIL (Ger.
_Reichshofrath_), a court or personal council of the Holy Roman Empire,
established in 1501 by Maximilian I., and co-ordinate with the Imperial
Chamber (_Reichskammergericht_). [L. _aulicus_--_aula_, Gr. _aul[=e]_, a
royal court.]

AUMAIL, aw-m[=a]l', _v.t._ to enamel: (_Spens._) to figure or variegate.
[See ENAMEL.]

AUMBRY, awm'bri, _n._ Same as AMBRY.

AUMIL, o'mil, _n._ Same as AMILDAR.

AUMUCE, aw'm[=u]s, _n._ Same as AMICE.

AUNT, änt, _n._ a father's or a mother's sister--also the wife of one's
uncle: (_obs._) an old woman, a gossip, a procuress or bawd.--AUNT SALLY, a
pastime at English fairs, in which a wooden head is set on a pole, and in
the mouth a pipe, which has to be smashed by throwing sticks or the like at
it. [O. Fr. _ante_ (Fr. _tante_)--L. _amita_, a father's sister.]

AURA, awr'a, _n._ a supposed subtle emanation proceeding from anything,
esp. that essence which is claimed to emanate from all living things and to
afford an atmosphere for the operations of animal magnetism and such-like
occult phenomena: (_fig._) air, distinctive character: (_path._) a
sensation as of a current of cold air--a premonitory symptom of epilepsy
and hysteria.--_adj._ AUR'AL, pertaining to the air, or to a subtle vapour
or exhalation arising from a body. [L. _aura_.]

AURAL, awr'al, _adj._ pertaining to the ear.--_adv._ AUR'ALLY. [L. _auris_,
ear.]

AURATE, awr'[=a]t, _n._ a compound of auric oxide with a base.--_adjs._
AUR'ATED, gold-coloured: compounded with auric acid; AUR'EATE, gilded:
golden.--_n._ AUR[=E]'ITY, the peculiar properties of gold. [L. _aurum_,
gold.]

AURELIA, awr-[=e]l'ya, _n._ the chrysalis of an insect, from its golden
colour.--_adj._ AUREL'IAN--formerly also a name for an entomologist devoted
esp. to butterflies and moths. [L. _aurum_, gold.]

[Illustration]

AUREOLA, awr-[=e]'o-la, _n._ in Christian art, the gold colour surrounding
the whole figure in sacred pictures, distinct from the _nimbus_, which only
covers the head, usually reserved for representations of the three Divine
Persons, of Christ, and the Virgin and Child: (_theol._) an increment to
the ordinary blessedness of heaven gained by virgins, martyrs, and doctors
for their triumph respectively over the flesh, the world, and the
devil.--_n._ AUR'EOLE, the aureola: the gold disc round the head in early
pictures symbolising glory: (_fig._) a glorifying halo: a halo of radiating
light, as in eclipses.--_p.adj._ AUR'EOLED, encircled with an aureole. [L.
_aureolus_, dim. of _aureus_, golden.]

AURIC, awr'ik, _adj._ pertaining to gold: (_chem._) applied to compounds in
which gold combines as a triad. [L. _aurum_, gold.]

AURICLE, awr'i-kl, _n._ the external ear: (_pl._) the two upper cavities of
the heart into which the blood comes from the veins.--_adj._ AUR'ICLED,
having appendages like ears.--_n._ AURIC'ULA, a species of primrose, also
called bear's ear, from the shape of its leaf.--_adj._ AURIC'ULAR,
pertaining to the ear: known by hearing, or by report.--_adv._
AURIC'ULARLY.--_adjs._ AURIC'ULATE, AURIC'ULATED, ear-shaped.--AURICULAR
CONFESSION, secret, told in the ear. [L. _auricula_, dim. of _auris_, the
ear.]

AURIFEROUS, awr-if'[.e]r-us, _adj._ bearing or yielding gold.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ AUR'IFY, to turn into gold. [L. _aurifer_--_aurum_, gold, _ferre_,
to bear.]

AURIFORM, awr'i-form, _adj._ ear-shaped. [L. _auris_, ear, and FORM.]

AURISCOPE, aw'ri-sk[=o]p, _n._ an instrument for examining the Eustachian
passage of the ear. [L. _auris_, ear, and Gr. _skopein_, to look.]

AURIST, awr'ist, _n._ one skilled in diseases of the ear. [L. _auris_,
ear.]

AUROCHS, awr'oks, _n._ the European bison or wild ox. [Ger. _auerochs_. Old
High Ger. _ûrohso_, _ur_ (L. _urus_, Gr. _ouros_), a kind of wild ox, and
_ochs_, ox.]

AURORA, aw-r[=o]'ra, _n._ the dawn: in poetry, the goddess of
dawn.--_adjs._ AUR[=O]'RAL, AUR[=O]'REAN.--_adv._ AUR[=O]'RALLY. [Acc. to
Curtius, a reduplicated form for _ausosa_; from a root seen in Sans. _ush_,
to burn; cog. with Gr. _[=e][=o]s_, dawn, _h[=e]lios_, the sun; Etruscan,
_Usil_, the god of the sun.]

AURORA BOREALIS, aw-r[=o]'ra b[=o]-r[=e]-[=a]'lis, the northern aurora or
light: a luminous meteoric phenomenon of electrical character seen in
northern latitudes, with a tremulous motion, and giving forth streams of
light.--AURORA AUSTRALIS (aws-tr[=a]'lis), a similar phenomenon in the
southern hemisphere:--_pl._ AUR[=O]'RAS. [L. _borealis_,
northern--_boreas_, the north wind. See AUSTRAL.]

AUSCULTATION, aws-kult-[=a]'shun, _n._ the art of discovering the condition
of the lungs and heart by applying the ear or the stethoscope to the
part.--_v.i._ to examine by auscultation.--_n._ AUSCULT[=A]'TOR, one who
practises auscultation, or an instrument for such: in Germany, a title
formerly given to one who had passed his first public examination in law,
and who was merely retained, not yet employed or paid by
government.--_adj._ AUSCULT'[=A]TORY, relating to auscultation. [L.
_auscult[=a]re_, to listen.]

AUSONIAN, aw-s[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ Italian. [L. _Ausonia_, a poetical name
for Italy.]

AUSPICE, aw'spis, _n._ an omen drawn from observing birds:
augury--generally used in _pl._ AU'SPICES, protection: patronage: a good
start (generally in phrase, UNDER THE AUSPICES OF).--_v.t._ AU'SPICATE, to
foreshow: to initiate or inaugurate with hopes of good luck:--_pr.p._
au'spic[=a]ting; _pa.p._ au'spic[=a]ted.--_adj._ AUSPI'CIOUS, having good
auspices or omens of success: favourable: fortunate: propitious.--_adv._
AUSPI'CIOUSLY.--_n._ AUSPI'CIOUSNESS. [Fr.--L. _auspicium_--_auspex_,
_auspicis_, a bird-seer, from _avis_, a bird, _spec[)e]re_, to observe.]

AUSTER, aws't[.e]r, _n._ the south wind. [L.]

AUSTERE, aws-t[=e]r', _adj._ harsh: severe: stern: grave: sober: severe in
self-discipline, strictly moral or abstinent: severely simple, without
luxury.--_adv._ AUSTERE'LY.--_ns._ AUSTERE'NESS, AUSTER'ITY, quality of
being austere: severity of manners or life: harshness: asceticism: severe
simplicity of style, dress, or habits. [L. _austerus_--Gr.
_aust[=e]ros_--_au-ein_, to dry.]

AUSTRAL, aws'tral, _adj._ southern.--_adj._ AUSTRALASIAN
(aws-tral-[=a]'zhi-an), pertaining to Australasia, or the islands and
island-groups that lie to the south of Asia.--_n._ a native or colonist of
one of these.--_adj._ AUSTR[=A]'LIAN, of or pertaining to Australia, a
large island between the Indian and Pacific Oceans.--_n._ an aboriginal
native of Australia proper, later also a white colonist or resident. [L.
_australis_--_auster_, the south wind.]

AUSTRIAN, aws'tri-an, _adj._ of or pertaining to Austria, an empire of
Central Europe.--_n._ a native of Austria.

AUSTRINGER, aw'string-[.e]r, _n._ a keeper of goshawks.--Also A'STRINGER.
[O. Fr. _ostruchier_, _austruchier_. See OSTRICH.]

AUTARCHY, awt'är-ki, _n._ absolute power. [Gr., from _autos_, self, and
_archein_, to rule.]

AUTHENTIC, -AL, aw-thent'ik, -al, _adj._ real: genuine, as opposed to
_counterfeit_, _apocryphal_: original: true: entitled to acceptance, of
established credibility. A distinction is sometimes made between
_authentic_ and _genuine_--the former, that the writing is trustworthy, as
setting forth real facts; the latter, that we have it as it left its
author's hands--an _authentic_ history: a _genuine_ text.--_adv._
AUTHENT'ICALLY. [Fr. and L. from Gr. _authent[=e]s_, one who does anything
with his own hand--_autos_, self.]

AUTHENTICATE, aw-thent'ik-[=a]t, _v.t._ to make authentic: to prove
genuine: to give legal validity to: to certify the authorship of.--_ns._
AUTHENTIC[=A]'TION, act of authenticating: confirmation; AUTHENTIC'ITY,
quality of being authentic: state of being true or in accordance with fact:
genuineness.

AUTHOR, awth'or, _n._ one who originates or brings anything into being: a
beginner or first mover of any action or state of things: the writer of an
original book: elliptically for an author's writings: one's authority for
something: an informant:--_fem._ AUTH'ORESS.--_adjs._ AUTH[=O]'RIAL,
AUTH'ORISH; AUTHOR[=I]S'ABLE.--_n._ AUTHORIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ AUTH'ORISE,
to give authority to: to sanction: to permit: to justify: to establish by
authority.--_adj._ AUTH'ORLESS, anonymous.--_ns._ AUTH'ORLING, a petty
author; AUTH'ORSHIP, AUTH'ORING, AUTH'ORISM, state or quality of being an
author. [Through Fr. from L. _auctor_--_aug[=e]re_, _auctum_, to cause
things to increase, to produce.]

AUTHORITY, awth-or'it-i, _n._ legal power or right: power derived from
office or character: weight of testimony: permission:--_pl._ AUTHOR'ITIES,
precedents: opinions or sayings carrying weight: persons in power.--_adj._
AUTHOR'ITATIVE, having the sanction or weight of authority:
dictatorial.--_adv._ AUTHOR'ITATIVELY.--_n._ AUTHOR'ITATIVENESS. [L.
_auctoritatem_, _auctoritas_, _auctor_.]

AUTOBIOGRAPHY, aw-to-b[=i]-og'raf-i, _n._ the biography or life of a person
written by himself.--_n._ AUTOBIOG'RAPHER, one who writes his own
life.--_adjs._ AUTOBIOGRAPH'IC, -AL. [Gr. _autos_, one's self, _bios_,
life, _graphein_, to write.]

AUTO-CAR, aw'to-kär, _n._ a vehicle for the road moved from within by
steam, electric power, &c. instead of by traction. [Gr. _autos_, self, and
CAR.]

AUTOCARPOUS, aw-to-kär'pus, _adj._ applied to such fruit as consists only
of the pericarp, with no adnate parts. [Gr. _autos_, self, _karpos_,
fruit.]

AUTOCHTHON, aw-tok'thon, _n._ one of the primitive inhabitants of a
country: an aboriginal:--_pl._ AUTOCH'THONS and AUTOCH'THONES.--_adj._
AUTOCH'THONOUS.--_ns._ AUTOCH'THONY, AUTOCH'THONISM, the condition of being
autochthonous. [Gr.; made up of _autos_, self, _chth[=o]n_, _chthonos_, the
soil; the Athenians claiming to have actually sprung from the soil on which
they lived.]

AUTOCRAT, aw'to-krat, _n._ one who rules by his own power: an absolute
sovereign.--_n._ AUTOC'RACY, an absolute government by one man:
despotism.--_adj._ AUTOCRAT'IC,--_adv._ AUTOCRAT'ICALLY. [Gr.
_autokrat[=e]s_--_autos_, self, _kratos_, power.]

AUTO-DA-FÉ, aw'to-da-f[=a]', _n._ the public declaration of the judgment
passed on heretics in Spain and Portugal by the Inquisition, also the
infliction of the punishment which immediately followed thereupon, esp. the
public burning of the victims:--_pl._ AUTOS-DA-FÉ. [Port. _auto da fé_ =
Sp. _auto de fe_; _auto_--L. _actum_, act; _da_--L. _de_, of; and _fe_--L.
_fides_, faith.]

AUTOGENOUS, aw-toj'e-nus, _adj._ self-generated: independent.--_n._
AUTOG'ENY, a mode of spontaneous generation. [Gr. _autogen[=e]s_, _autos_,
self, _genos_, offspring.]

AUTOGRAPH, aw'to-graf, _n._ one's own handwriting: a signature: an original
manuscript.--_v.t._ to write with one's hand.--_adj._ AUTOGRAPH'IC.--_adv._
AUTOGRAPH'ICALLY.--_n._ AU'TOGRAPHY, act of writing with one's own hand:
reproduction of the outline of a writing or drawing by fac-simile. [Gr.
_autos_, self, _graph[=e]_, writing.]

AUTOGRAVURE, aw-to-grav'[=u]r, _n._ a process of photo-engraving akin to
autotype. [Gr. _auto_, self; Fr. _gravure_, engraving.]

AUTOLATRY, aw-tol'a-tri, _n._ worship of one's self.--_n._ AUTOL'OGY is
merely a justifiable enough scientific study of ourselves. [Gr. _autos_,
self, _latreia_, worship.]

AUTOLYCUS, aw-tol'i-kus, _n._ a thief: a snapper up of unconsidered
trifles: a plagiarist. [From the character in Shakespeare's _Winter's
Tale_.]

AUTOMATON, aw-tom'a-ton, _n._ a self-moving machine, or one which moves by
concealed machinery: a living being regarded as without consciousness: the
self-acting power of the muscular and nervous systems, by which movement is
effected without intelligent determination: a human being who acts by
routine, without intelligence:--_pl._ AUTOM'ATONS, AUTOM'ATA.--_adjs._
AUTOMAT'IC, -AL.--_adv._ AUTOMAT'ICALLY.--_ns._ AUTOM'ATISM, automatic or
involuntary action: power of self-moving: power of initiating vital
processes from within the cell, organ, or organism, independently of any
direct or immediate stimulus from without: the doctrine that animals are
automata, their motions, &c., being the result of mechanical laws;
AUTOM'ATIST, one who holds the doctrine of automatism. [Gr. _automatos_,
self-moving--_autos_, self, and a stem _mat-_, to strive after, to move.]

AUTOMOBILE, aw-to-m[=o]'bil, _adj._ self-moving.--_n._ a motor-car. [Gr.
_autos_, self, L. _mobilis_, mobile.]

AUTOMORPHIC, aw-to-mor'fik, _adj._ marked by automorphism, the ascription
to others of one's own characteristics. [Gr. _autos_, self, _morph[=e]_,
form.]

AUTONOMY, aw-ton'om-i, _n._ the power or right of self-government: (Kant's
_philos._) the doctrine that the human will carries its guiding principle
within itself.--_adjs._ AUTON'OMOUS, AUTONOM'IC. [Gr.--_autos_, and
_nomos_, law.]

AUTONYM, aw'ton-im, _n._ a writing published under the author's real name.
[Gr. _autos_, self, _onoma_, a name.]

AUTOPHAGOUS, aw-tof'ag-us, _adj._ self-devouring.--_n._ AUTOPH'AGY,
sustenance by self-absorption of the tissues of the body. [Gr. _autos_,
self, _phagein_, to eat.]

AUTOPHOBY, aw-tof'ob-i, _n._ a shrinking from making any reference to one's
self. [Gr. _autos_, self, _phobia_, fear.]

AUTOPHONY, aw-tof'on-i, _n._ observation of the resonance of one's own
voice, heard by placing the ear to the patient's chest. [Gr. _autos_, self,
_ph[=o]n[=e]_, sound.]

AUTOPLASTY, aw'to-plas-ti, _n._ a mode of surgical treatment which consists
in replacing a diseased part by means of healthy tissue from another part
of the same body. [Gr. _auto-plastos_, self-formed.]

AUTOPSY, aw'top-si, _n._ personal inspection, esp. the examination of a
body after death.--Also AUTOP'SIA. [Gr.; _autos_, self, _opsis_, sight.]

AUTOPTIC, -AL, aw-topt'ik, -al, _adj._ seen with one's own eyes.--_adv._
AUTOPT'ICALLY. [See AUTOPSY.]

AUTOSCHEDIASM, aw-to-sked'i-azm, _n._ anything extemporised.--_v.t._
AUTOSCHED'IASE.--_adj._ AUTOSCHEDIAS'TIC. [Gr. _autos_, self, _schedios_,
off-hand.]

AUTOTHEISM, aw'to-th[=e]-izm, _n._ assumption of divine powers: the
doctrine of the self-subsistence of God, esp. of the second person in the
Trinity.--_n._ AU'TOTHEIST, a self-deifier. [Gr. _autos_, self, _theos_, a
god.]

AUTOTYPE, aw'to-t[=i]p, _n._ a true impress or copy of the original: a
process of printing from a photographic negative in a permanent black or
other pigment.--_v.t._ to reproduce by such a process.--_n._
AUTOTYPOG'RAPHY, a process by which drawings made on gelatine are
transferred to a plate from which impressions may be taken. [Gr. _autos_,
self, _typos_, a stamp.]

AUTUMN, aw'tum, _n._ the third season of the year when fruits are gathered
in, popularly comprising the months of August, September, and October--in
North America, September, October, and November. Astronomically, in the
northern hemisphere, it begins at the autumnal equinox, when the sun enters
Libra, 22d September, and ends at the winter solstice, when the sun enters
Capricorn, 21st December.--_adj._ AUTUM'NAL.--_adv._ AUTUM'NALLY. [L.
_autumnus_, _auctumnus_, anciently referred to aug-[=e]re, as the season of
increase; by Corssen and others, to the Sans. _av_, to do good to.]

AUXESIS, awk-s[=e]'sis, _n._ gradual deepening in force of meaning:
hyperbole. [Gr.]

AUXILIAR, awg-zil'yar, AUXILIARY, awg-zil'yar-i, _adj._ helping:
subsidiary, as troops.--_ns._ AUXIL'IAR, an auxiliary; AUXIL'IARY, a
helper: an assistant: (_gram._) a verb that helps to form the moods and
tenses of other verbs. [L. _auxiliaris_--_auxilium_, help--_aug-[=e]re_, to
increase.]

AVA, ä'va, _n._ native name in the Sandwich Islands for a species of
cordyline yielding an intoxicating drink, also called _kava_: any similar
drink.

AVAIL, a-v[=a]l', _v.t._ to be of value or service to: to benefit: to take
the benefit of (used reflexively with _of_).--_v.i._ to be of use: to
answer the purpose: (_obs._) to take or draw advantage: (_Amer._) to
inform, assure of.--_n._ benefit: profit: service.--_adj._ AVAIL'ABLE, that
one may avail one's self of, utilise: profitable: suitable, obtainable:
accessible.--_ns._ AVAIL'ABLENESS, AVAILABIL'ITY, quality of being
available: power in promoting an end in view: validity.--_advs._
AVAIL'ABLY; AVAIL'INGLY, in an availing manner. [Fr.--L. _ad_, to,
_val-[=e]re_, to be strong, to be worth.]

AVAIL. Same as AVALE.

AVALANCHE, av'al-ansh, _n._ a mass of snow and ice sliding down from a
mountain: a snow-slip.--_v.i._ AV[=A]LE' (_Spens._), to descend.--_v.t._
(_Spens._) to cause to descend. [Fr. _avaler_, to slip down--L. _ad_, to,
_vall-em_, the valley.]

AVANT, av'ang, prefix used as _adj._ in combination, as in AV'ANT-COUR'IER,
one who runs before, in _pl._ the skirmishers or advance-guard of an army;
AV'ANT-GARDE, the vanguard of an army. [Fr.;--L. _ante_.]

AVANTURINE. See AVENTURINE.

AVARICE, av'ar-is, _n._ eager desire for wealth: covetousness.--_adj._
AVARI'CIOUS, extremely covetous: greedy.--_adv._ AVARI'CIOUSLY.--_n._
AVARI'CIOUSNESS. [Fr.--L. _avaritia_--_avarus_, greedy--_av[=e]re_, to pant
after.]

AVAST, a-väst', _interj._ (_naut._) hold fast! stop! [Dut. _houd vast_,
hold fast.]

AVATAR, a-va-tär', _n._ the descent of a Hindu deity in a visible form:
incarnation: (_fig._) supreme glorification of any principle. [Sans.;
_ava_, away, down, _tar_, to pass over.]

AVAUNT, a-vawnt', _interj._ move on! begone! (_Shak._) used as _n._ 'to
give her the _avaunt_.'--_v.i._ (_Spens._) to advance: (_obs._) depart.
[Fr. _avant_, forward--L. _ab_, from, _ante_, before.]

AVAUNT, a-vawnt', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to advance boastfully. [O. Fr.
_avanter_--Low L. _vanitare_, to boast--L. _vanus_, vain.]

AVE, [=a]'v[=e], _interj._ and _n._ be well or happy: hail, an address or
prayer to the Virgin Mary: in full, _Ave Mar[=i]'a_.--AVE MARIA, or AVE
MARY, the Hail Mary, or angelic salutation (Luke, i. 28). [L. _av[=e]re_,
to be well or propitious. See ANGELUS.]

AVENACEOUS, av'en-[=a]-shus, _adj._ of the nature of oats. [L. _avena_,
oats.]

AVENGE, a-venj', _v.t._ to vindicate: take vengeance on some one on account
of some injury or wrong (with _on_, _upon_; _of_ obsolete).--_adj._
AVENGE'FUL.--_ns._ AVENGE'MENT; AVENG'ER, one who avenges:--_fem._
AVENG'ERESS. [O. Fr. _avengier_--L. _vindic[=a]re_. See VENGEANCE.]

AVENS, [=a]'vens, _n._ popular name of two species of _Geum_--the herb
bennet (once used to flavour ale) and the sub-alpine mountain-avens. [Fr.]

[Illustration]

AVENTAIL, AVENTAILE, av'en-t[=a]l, _n._ the flap or movable part of a
helmet in front, for admitting air to the wearer. [O. Fr. _esventail_,
air-hole--L. _ex_, out, _ventus_, wind.]

AVENTRE, a-ven'tr, _v.t._ or _v.i._ (_Spens._) to throw, as a spear or
dart. [O. Fr. _venter_, to cast to the wind.]

AVENTURE, a-vent'[=u]r, _v.t._ obsolete form of ADVENTURE.

AVENTURINE, a-ven't[=u]-rin, _n._ a brown, spangled kind of Venetian glass:
a kind of quartz.--Also AVAN'TURINE. [It. _avventura_, chance--because of
the accidental discovery of the glass.]

AVENUE, av'en-[=u], _n._ the principal approach to a country-house, usually
bordered by trees: a double row of trees, with or without a road: a wide
and handsome street, with or without trees, esp. in America: any passage or
entrance into a place: (_fig._) means of access or attainment. [Fr.: from
L. _ad_, to, _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

AVER, a-v[.e]r', _v.t._ to declare to be true: to affirm or declare
positively: (_law_) to prove or justify a plea:--_pr.p._ aver'ring; _pa.p._
averred.--_n._ AVER'MENT, positive assertion: (_law_) a formal offer to
prove a plea: the proof offered. [Fr. _avérer_--L. _ad_, and _verus_,
true.]

AVERAGE, av'[.e]r-[=a]j, _n._ the mean value or quantity of a number of
values or quantities: any expense incurred beyond the freight, payable by
the owner of the goods shipped, as in the phrase PETTY AVERAGE: any loss or
damage to ship or cargo from unavoidable accidental causes--PARTICULAR
AVERAGE. Again, GENERAL AVERAGE is the apportionment of loss caused by
measures taken for the ship's safety, as cutting away the masts, throwing
overboard cargo, accepting towage, or the like.--_adj._ containing a mean
value: ordinary.--_v.t._ to fix an average.--_v.i._ to exist in, or form, a
mean quantity. [Dr Murray says the word first appears about 1500 in
connection with the maritime trade of the Mediterranean (Fr. _avarie_, Sp.
_averia_, It. _avaria_); probably _averia_ is a derivative of It. _avere_
(O. Fr. _aveir_), goods, the original sense being a 'charge on property or
goods.' The It. _avere_ and O. Fr. _aveir_ meant goods, substance,
cattle--L. _hab[=e]re_, to have. The Old Eng. _aver_ in the same sense is
obsolete, but in Scotland _aver_ still means an old horse.]

AVERROISM, av-er-[=o]'izm, _n._ the doctrine of the Arabian philosopher
Averrhoes (died 1198), that the soul is perishable, the only immortal soul
being the world-soul from which individual souls went forth, and to which
they return.--_n._ AVERR[=O]'IST, one who holds this doctrine.

AVERRUNCATE, a-v[.e]r-ungk'[=a]t, _v.t._ (_rare_) to avert or ward off: to
pull up by the roots.--_ns._ AVERRUNC[=A]'TION, act of averting:
extirpation; AVERRUNC'[=A]TOR, an instrument for cutting off branches of
trees. [L. _averrunc[=a]re_, to avert.]

AVERSE, a-v[.e]rs', _adj._ having a disinclination or hatred (with _to_;
_from_ is, however, still used): disliking: turned away from anything:
turned backward; (_her._) turned so as to show the back, as of a right
hand.--_n._ AVERS[=A]'TION (_obs._).--_adv._ AVERSE'LY.--_n._ AVERSE'NESS.
[L. _aversus_, turned away, _pa.p._ of _avert-[)e]re_. See AVERT.]

AVERSION, a-v[.e]r'-shun, _n._ dislike: hatred: the object of dislike. [See
AVERT.]

AVERT, a-v[.e]rt', _v.t._ to turn from or aside: to prevent: ward
off.--_p.adj._ AVERT'ED.--_adv._ AVERT'EDLY.--_adj._ AVERT'IBLE, capable of
being averted. [L. _avert-[=e]re_--_ab_, from, _vert-[)e]re_, to turn.]

AVERTIMENT, for ADVERTISEMENT (_Milton_).

AVES, [=a]'v[=e]z, _n.pl._ birds. [L.]

AVIARY, [=a]'vi-ar-i, _n._ a place for keeping birds.--_n._ A'VIARIST, one
who keeps an aviary. [L. _aviarium_--_avis_, a bird.]

AVICULTURE, [=a]'vi-kul-t[=u]r, _n._ rearing of birds: bird-fancying. [L.
_avis_, bird, and CULTURE.]

AVIDITY, a-vid'i-ti, _n._ eagerness: greediness.--_adj._ AV'ID, greedy:
eager. [L. _aviditas_--_avidus_, greedy--_av[=e]re_, to pant after.]

AVIFAUNA, [=a]'vi-fawn-a, _n._ the whole of the birds found in a region or
country: the fauna as regards birds. [L. _avis_, bird, and FAUNA.]

AVISED. See BLACK-AVISED.

AVISO. See ADVISO (under ADVICE).--AVIS, AVISE, obsolete forms of
ADVISE.--_adj._ AVISE'FUL (_Spens._), watchful, circumspect.

AVITAL, av'i-tal, _adj._ of a grandfather: ancestral. [L. _avitus_,
pertaining to a grandfather (_avus_).]

AVIZANDUM, av-iz-an'dum, _n._ (_Scots law_) private consideration of a case
by a judge before giving judgment.--Also AVISAN'DUM. [Gerund of Low L.
_avisare_, to advise.]

AVOCADO, a-vo-kä'do, _n._ the alligator-pear, a West Indian fruit. [Corr.
from Mexican.]

AVOCATION, a-vo-k[=a]'shun, _n._ formerly and properly, a diversion or
distraction from one's regular employment--now, one's proper business =
VOCATION: business which calls for one's time and attention: (_arch._)
diversion of the thoughts from any employment: the calling of a case from
an inferior to a superior court. [Through Fr. from _avocation-em_, a
calling away--_ab_, from, _voc[=a]re_, to call.]

AVOCET, AVOSET, av'o-set, _n._ a widely spread genus of birds, with webbed
feet, long legs, bare thighs, a long, slender, upward-curved, elastic bill,
and snipe-like habit. [Fr. _avocette_, It. _avosetta_.]

AVOID, a-void', _v.t._ to try to escape from: to shun: (_law_) to
invalidate: (_Shak._) to leave, to quit.--_adj._ AVOID'ABLE.--_n._
AVOID'ANCE, the act of avoiding or shunning: act of annulling. [Pfx. _a-_ =
Fr. _es_ = L. _ex_, out, and VOID.]

AVOIRDUPOIS, av-or-d[=u]-poiz', _adj._ or _n._ a system of weights in which
the lb. equals 16 oz. [O. Fr. _aveir de pes_ (_avoir du pois_), to have
weight--L. _hab-[=e]re_, to have, _pensum_, that which is weighed.]

AVOSET. See AVOCET.

AVOUCH, a-vowch', _v.t._ to avow: to assert or own positively: to maintain:
guarantee; to appeal to. _v.i._ to give assurance of.--_n._ (_Shak._)
evidence.--_adj._ AVOUCH'ABLE.--_n._ AVOUCH'MENT. [O. Fr. _avochier_--L.
_advoc[=a]re_, to call to one's aid. See VOUCH.]

AVOURE, a-vowr', _n._ (_Spens._) confession, acknowledgment, justification.
[See AVOW.]

AVOW, a-vow', _v.t._ to declare openly: to own or confess: to affirm or
maintain: (_law_) to justify an act done.--_n._ a solemn promise: a
vow.--_pa.p._ as _adj._ self-acknowledged.--_adj._ AVOW'ABLE.--_ns._
AVOW'ABLENESS, AVOW'ANCE (_obs._); AVOW'AL, a positive declaration: a frank
confession.--_adv._ AVOW'EDLY.--_n._ AVOW'RY (_law_), the act of avowing
and justifying in one's own right the distraining of goods: (_obs._)
advocacy considered as personified in a patron saint. [O. Fr. _avouer_,
orig. to swear fealty to--L. _ad_, and Low L. _vot[=a]re_--_votum_, a vow.
See VOW.]

AVULSE, a-vuls', _v.t._ to pluck or tear away.--_n._ AVUL'SION, forcible
separation. [L. _avell-[)e]re_, _avulsum_.]

AVUNCULAR, a-vung'k[=u]-lar, _adj._ pertaining to an uncle.--_v.t._ or
_v.i._ AVUNC'ULISE (_Fuller_), to act like an uncle. [L. _avunculus_, an
uncle.]

AWAIT, a-w[=a]t', _v.t._ to wait or look for: to be in store for: to
attend: (_obs._) to lie in wait for, to watch. [Through Fr. from the common
Teutonic root of Ger. _wacht_, _en_, Eng. WAIT.]

AWAKE, a-w[=a]k', _v.t._ to rouse from sleep: to rouse from a state of
inaction.--_v.i._ to cease sleeping: to rouse one's self from sleep or
indifference:--_pa.p._ awaked', or awoke'.--_adj._ not asleep:
vigilant.--_adj._ AWAK'ABLE, capable of being awakened.--_v.t._ and _v.i._
AWAK'EN, to awake: to rouse into interest or attention: (_theol._) to call
to a sense of sin.--_adj._ AWAK'ENABLE.--_ns._ AWAK'ENMENT, AWAK'ING,
AWAK'ENING, the act of awaking or ceasing to sleep: an arousing from
indifference: a revival of religion.--TO BE AWAKE TO, to be fully aware of
anything. [A.S. _awæcnan_. See WAKE, WATCH.]

AWANTING, a-wont'ing, _adj._ wanting: missing. [Framed as if from a verb
_awant_--mostly Scotch.]

AWARD, a-wawrd', _v.t._ to adjudge: to determine.--_n._ judgment: final
decision, esp. of arbitrators.--_adj._ AWARD'ABLE, that may be
awarded.--_n._ AWARD'MENT. [O. Fr. _ewarder_, _eswarder_, from an assumed
Romanic form compounded of _ex_, thoroughly, and _guardare_, watch. See
WARD, GUARD.]

AWARE, a-w[=a]r', _adj._ wary: informed, conscious (with _of_)--_ns._
AWARE'DOM (_H. Walpole_), AWARE'NESS. [A.S. _gewær_, pfx. _ge-_, and _wær_,
cautious. See WARY.]

AWARN, a-wawrn', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to warn. [Pfx, _a-_, and WARN.]

AWASH, a-wosh', _adv._ on a level with the surface of the water: floating
at the mercy of the waves. [Pfx. _a-_, and WASH.]

AWASTE, a-w[=a]st', _adv._ wasting.

AWATCH, a-wotch', _adv._ watching.

AWAVE, a-w[=a]v', _adv._ waving.

AWAY, a-w[=a]', _adv._ onward, along: forthwith: in the direction of,
about: absent: gone, dead, fainted.--_interj._ begone!--AWAY
(elliptically), to go away, esp. imperatively, AWAY! or AWAY WITH
YOU!--AWAY WITH HIM = take him away.--FIRE AWAY, fire at once, without
hesitation.--I CANNOT AWAY WITH = bear or endure.--MAKE AWAY WITH, to
destroy.--ONCE AND AWAY, once in a way (the usual modern form),
once.--THERE AWAY, in that direction, thereabout.--TO DO AWAY (_with_), to
make an end of anything; TO EXPLAIN AWAY, to explain till the thing that
needs explanation is itself removed; TO FALL AWAY (with _from_), to desert;
TO FIGHT AWAY, to go on fighting; TO WORK AWAY, to keep on working. [A.S.
_a-weg_--prep. _a_, on, _weg_, way, lit. 'on one's way.']

AWE, aw, _n._ reverential fear, or wonder: dread: (_arch._) power to
inspire awe.--_v.t._ to strike with or influence by fear.--_adj._ AWE'LESS,
without fear.--_n._ AWE'LESSNESS.--_adjs._ AWE'SOME, AW'SOME (_Scot._),
full of awe: inspiring awe: weird, dreadful.--_v.t._ AWE'-STRIKE, to strike
with awe.--_adjs._ AWE'-STRUCK, struck or affected with awe; AW'FUL, full
of awe: dreadful: inspiring respect: expressive of awe: (_slang_) ugly: and
as a mere intensive of anything.--_adv._ AW'FULLY (also in _slang_ merely =
very).--_n._ AW'FULNESS. [Ice. _agi_, A.S. _ege_, fear; cog. with Gael.
_eaghal_; Gr. _achos_, anguish.]

AWEARY, a-w[=e]'ri, _adj._ weary (with _of_).--_adj._ AWEA'RIED, weary.
[Pfx. _a-_, and WEARY.]

A-WEATHER, a-we_th_'[.e]r, _adv._ (_naut._) towards the weather or windward
side, in the direction from which the wind blows, applied to the position
of a helm when its tiller is moved to the windward side of the ship--opp.
to _A-lee_. [Prep. _a_, on, and WEATHER.]

A-WEEK, a-w[=e]k', _adv. phrase_, in the week, per week. [Prep. _a_, and
WEEK.]

A-WEIGH, a-w[=a]', _adv._ in the act of being weighed, as an anchor, when
the strain on the cable has just raised it from the bottom. [Prep. _a_, and
WEIGH.]

AWHAPE, a-hw[=a]p', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to strike: to terrify. [Dr Murray
compares the Goth. _af hwapjan_, to choke, which would give an A.S.
_ofhweppan_. See WHAP.]

AWHILE, a-hw[=i]l', _adv._ for some time: for a short time. [A.S. _áne
hwíle_ = a while; combined as early as 13th century.]

A-WING, a-wing', _adv. phrase_, on the wing. [Prep. _a_, and WING.]

AWKWARD, awk'ward, _adj._ clumsy: ungraceful: embarrassed: difficult to
deal with: (_Shak._) unfavourable: (_obs._) froward.--_adj._
AWK'WARDISH.--_adv._ AWK'WARDLY, clumsily, embarrassingly,
dangerously.--_n._ AWK'WARDNESS. [Prob. Ice. _afug_, turned wrong way, and
suff. _-ward_, expressing direction.]

AWL, awl, _n._ a pointed instrument for boring small holes in leather.
[A.S. _æl_; cog. with Ice. _alr_, Ger. _ahle_.]

AWN, awn, _n._ a scale or husk: beard of corn or grass.--_adjs._ AWNED;
AWN'LESS; AWN'Y. [Ice. _ögn_; Ger. _ahne_.]

AWNING, awn'ing, _n._ a covering to shelter from the sun's rays. [Perh. due
to the Fr. _auvent_, a screen of cloth before a shop window, with Eng.
ending _-ing_. Skeat suggests Pers. _áwan_, _áwang_, anything suspended.
The history of the word is still unsolved.]

AWOKE, a-w[=o]k', did awake--_pa.t._ of AWAKE.

AWORK, a-wurk', _adv._ at work. [Prep. _a_, and WORK.]

AWRACK, a-rak', _adv._ in a state of wreck.

AWRONG, a-rong', _adv._ wrongly.

AWRY, a-r[=i]', _adj._ twisted to one side: distorted, crooked: wrong:
perverse.--_adv._ unevenly: perversely: erroneously.--TO LOOK AWRY, to look
askance at anything; TO WALK AWRY, to go wrong. [Prep. _a_, on, and WRY.]

AXE, AX, aks, _n._ a well-known tool or instrument for hewing or chopping,
usually of iron with a steel edge:--_pl._ AX'ES. [A.S. _æx_; L. _ascia_;
Gr. _axin[=e]_.]

AXILE, aks'il, _adj._ lying in the axis of anything, as an embryo in the
axis of a seed.

AXILLA, aks'il-la, _n._ (_anat._) the armpit.--_ns._ AX'ILLA, AX'IL
(_bot._), the angle between the upper side of a branch and the trunk, or a
petiole and the stem it springs from.--_adjs._ AX'ILLAR, AX'ILLARY. [L.
_axilla_, the armpit.]

AXINOMANCY, aks'in-o-man-si, _n._ a mode of divination from the motions of
an axe poised upon a stake, or of an agate placed upon a red-hot axe. [Gr.
_axin[=e]_, an axe, and _manteia_, divination.]

AXIOM, aks'yum, _n._ a self-evident truth: a universally received principle
in an art or science.--_adjs._ AXIOMAT'IC, AXIOMAT'ICAL.--_adv._
AXIOMAT'ICALLY. [Gr. _axi[=o]ma_--_axio-ein_, to think worth, to take for
granted--_axios_, worth.]

AXIS, aks'is, _n._ the axle, or the line, real or imaginary, on which a
body revolves: the straight line about which the parts of a body or system
are systematically arranged, or which passes through the centre of all the
corresponding parallel sections of it, as of a cylinder, globe, or
spheroid. The axis of a curved line is formed by a right line dividing the
curve into two symmetrical parts, as in the parabola, ellipse, and
hyperbola:--_pl._ AXES (aks'[=e]z).--_adj._ AX'IAL.--_adv._ AX'IALLY.--_n._
AX'OID, a curve generated by the revolution of a point round an advancing
axis.--AXIS OF A LENS, the right line passing through a lens in such a
manner as to be perpendicular to both sides of it; AXIS OF A TELESCOPE, a
right line which passes through the centres of all the glasses in the tube;
AXIS OF INCIDENCE, the line passing through the point of incidence
perpendicularly to the refracting surface; AXIS OF REFRACTION, the
continuation of the same line through the refracting medium; AXIS OF THE
EQUATOR, the polar diameter of the earth, which is also the axis of
rotation; AXIS OF THE EYE, the right line passing through the centres of
the pupil and the crystalline lens. [L. _axis_; cf. Gr. _ax[=o]n_, Sans.
_aksha_, A.S. _eax_.]

AXIS, aks'is, _n._ the hog-deer of India. [L. _axis_, Pliny's name for an
Indian quadruped.]

AXLE, aks'l, AXLE-TREE, aks'l-tr[=e], _n._ the pin or rod in the nave of a
wheel on which the wheel turns: a pivot or support of any kind; the
imaginary line of ancient cosmographers on which a planet revolved.--_adj._
AX'LED. [More prob. Norse _öxull_ than a dim. from A.S. _eax_.]

AXOLOTL, aks'o-lotl, _n._ a reptile found in Mexico, allied to the tailed
batrachia, but distinguished by retaining its gills through life.
[Mexican.]

AY, [=a], _interj._ ah! oh! alas! esp. in _ay me!_ [M. E. _ey_, _ei_, perh.
from Fr. _ahi_, _aï_; cf. Sp. _ay de mi!_]

AY, AYE, [=i], _adv._ yea: yes: indeed.--_n._ AYE ([=i]), a vote in the
affirmative: (_pl._) those who vote in the affirmative. [Perh. a dial. form
of _aye_, ever; perh. a variant of _yea_.]

AYAH, [=a]'ya, _n._ a native Indian waiting-maid. [Anglo-Ind.: Hind.
_[=a]ya_, derived from the Port. _aia_, nurse.]

AYE, AY, [=a], _adv._ ever: always: for ever.--FOR AYE, FOR EVER AND AYE,
for ever, to all eternity.--In combination, with sense of 'ever,' as in
Shakespeare's 'aye-remaining,' &c. [Ice. _ei_, ever; A.S. _a_; conn. with
AGE, EVER.]

AYE-AYE, [=i]'[=i], _n._ a quadruped about the size of a hare found in
Madagascar, closely allied to the lemurs, with much of the aspect of a
squirrel. [Malagasy _aiay_.]

AYELP, a-y[.e]lp', _adv._ yelping.

AYENBITE, [=i]'en-b[=i]t, _n._ (_obs._) remorse, as in the book-title
_Ayenbite of Inwyt_ ('remorse of conscience'). [M. E. _ayen_, again bite.]

AYGULETS, obsolete form of AIGLETS.

AYME, obsolete form of AIM.

AYRY. See EYRY.

AZALEA, a-z[=a]'le-a, _n._ a genus of shrubby plants, with fine white,
yellow, or crimson flowers, mostly natives of China or North America,
closely allied to the rhododendron. [Gr. _azaleos_, dry--_aza_, dryness.]

AZIMUTH, az'im-uth, _n._ the arc of the horizon between the meridian of a
place and a vertical circle passing through any celestial body.--_adj._
AZ'IMUTHAL, pertaining to the azimuth. [Ar. _as-sum[=u]t_, _as_ = _al_,
the, _s[=u]mut_, _samt_, direction. See ZENITH.]

AZO-, in combination, for AZOTE.

AZOIC, a-z[=o]'ik, _adj._ without life: before the existence of animal
life: formed when there was no animal life on the globe, as rocks. [Gr.
_a_, neg., and _z[=o][=e]_, life--_za-ein_, to live.]

AZONIC, a-zon'ik, _adj._ not limited to a zone, not local. [Gr.; _a_, neg.,
_z[=o]n[=e]_, a belt region.]

AZOTE, a-z[=o]t', _n._ an old name for nitrogen, so called because it does
not sustain animal life.--_adj._ AZOT'IC.--_v.t._ AZ'OTISE, to impregnate
with acid.--_n._ AZ'OTITE, a salt of azotic or nitrous acid.--_adj._
AZOT'OUS, nitrous. [Gr. _a_, neg., and _za-ein_, to live.]

AZOTH, äz'[=o]th, _n._ the alchemist's name for mercury: Paracelsus's
universal remedy. [From Ar. _az-z[=a][=u]g_, _az_ = _al_, the,
_z[=a][=u]g_, from Pers. _zh[=i]wah_, quicksilver.]

AZRAEL, az'r[=a]-el, _n._ in Mohammedan mythology, the angel of death.

AZTEC, az'tek, _adj._ relating to or descended from the Aztecs, the
dominant tribe in Mexico at the time of the arrival of the Spaniards.

AZURE, azh'[=u]r, or [=a]'zh[=u]r, _adj._ of a faint blue: sky-coloured;
clear, cloudless.--_n._ a delicate blue colour: the sky.--_adjs._
AZUR[=E]'AN, AZ'URINE, azure.--_n._ AZ'URITE, blue carbonate of
copper.--_adjs._ AZ'URN (_Milton_), azure; AZ'URY, bluish. [O. Fr.
_azur_--Low L. _azura_--Ar. (_al_) _lazward_, Pers. _l[=a]jward_, lapis
lazuli, blue colour.]

AZYGOUS, az'i-gus, _adj._ not yoked or joined with another: (_anat._) not
one of a pair, as a muscle. [Gr. _azygos_--_a_, neg., and _zygos_, a yoke,
from _zeugnumi_, to join.]

AZYMOUS, az'i-mus, _adj._ unfermented: unleavened.--_ns._ AZ'YM, AZ'YME,
unleavened bread; AZ'YMITE, a member of a church using unleavened bread in
the Eucharist--a name applied by the Eastern Church to the Western, as well
as to the Armenian and Maronite Churches. [Gr. _azymos_--_a_, neg.,
_[=e]zym_, leaven.]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

the second letter of our alphabet, called by the Phoenicians _beth_, 'the
house,' coresponding to Greek [Greek: beta], '_beta_.'--B in music is the
seventh note of the scale of C major; B or B FLAT, a humorous euphemism for
the domestic _bug_.

BAA, bä, _n._ the cry of a sheep.--_v.i._ to cry or bleat as a sheep.--_n._
BAA'ING. [From the sound.]

BAAL, b[=a]'al, _n._ the chief male deity of the Phoenician nations: a
false god generally:--_pl._ B[=A]'ALIM.--_ns._ B[=A]'ALISM; B[=A]'ALITE.
[Heb.]

BABBLE, bab'bl, _v.i._ to speak like a baby: to make a continuous murmuring
sound like a brook, &c.: to make a babbling noise: to tell secrets.--_v.t._
to prate: to utter.--_adjs._ BAB'BLATIVE, BAB'BLY.--_ns._ BAB'BLE,
BAB'BLEMENT, BAB'BLING, idle senseless talk: prattle: confused murmur, as
of a stream; BAB'BLER, one who babbles. [Prob. imit., from the repeated
syllable _ba_; cf. Dut. _babbelen_, Ger. _pappelen_, Fr. _babiller_.]

BABE, b[=a]b, BABY, b[=a]'bi, _n._ an infant or child: a doll, puppet: the
reflection of one's self in miniature seen in the pupil of another's
eye.--_ns._ B[=A]'BY-FARM'ER, one who takes in infants to nurse on payment;
B[=A]'BYHOOD.--_adj._ B[=A]'BYISH.--_n._ B[=A]'BY-JUMP'ER, a seat suspended
from the ceiling of a room by elastic straps, to enable a baby to jump.
[Prob. imitative. See BABBLE.]

BABEL, b[=a]'bel, _n._ a lofty structure: a confused combination of sounds:
a scene of confusion.--_ns._ B[=A]'BELDOM, B[=A]'BELISM. [Heb. _Babel_,
explained in Gen. xi. as confusion.]

BABIROUSSA, -RUSSA, ba-bi-r[=oo]'sa, _n._ a species of wild hog found in
the East Indies, often called the horned or deer hog. [Malay _bâbi_, hog,
and _rûsa_, deer.]

BABOO, bä'b[=oo], _n._ orig. the Hindu title corresponding to our _Mr_, but
often applied disparagingly to a Hindu with a superficial English
education, or adjectively as in 'baboo English,' which is more copious than
correct, with long and learned words often most ingeniously
misapplied.--_ns._ BA'BOODOM, BA'BOOISM. [Hind. _b[=a]b[=u]_.]

BABOON, ba-b[=oo]n', _n._ a species of large monkey, having a long face,
dog-like tusks, large lips, and a short tail.--_n._ BABOON'ERY.--_adj._
BABOON'ISH. [Fr. _babouin_; remoter origin unknown.]

BABYLONIAN, bab-i-l[=o]n'i-an, _adj._ pertaining to Babylon: hence (_fig._)
huge, gigantic: Romish, popish (_obs._ from the identification with Rome of
the scarlet woman of Rev. xvii.); BABEL-LIKE, confused in language.--Also
BABYLON'ISH.

BACCALAUREATE, bak-ka-law're-[=a]t, _n._ the university degree of
bachelor.--_adj._ BACCALAU'REAN [Low L. _baccalaureus_, corrupted from,
_baccalarius_, with some imaginary reference to _bacca lauri_, the laurel
berry. See BACHELOR.]

BACCARAT, BACCARA, bak-ar-[=a]', _n._ a French game of cards played by any
number of betters and a banker. [Fr. _baccara_.]

BACCATE, bak'[=a]t, _adj._ having berries: berry-like or pulpy.--_adjs._
BACCIFEROUS (bak-sif'[.e]r-us), bearing berries; BAC'CIFORM, of the shape
of a berry; BACCIV'OROUS, living on berries. [L. _baccatus_--_bacca_, a
berry.]

BACCHANAL, bak'a-nal, _n._ a worshipper of Bacchus: one who indulges in
drunken revels: a dance or song in honour of Bacchus.--_adj._ relating to
drunken revels--also BACCHAN[=A]'LIAN.--_ns.pl._ BACCHAN[=A]'LIA,
BAC'CHANALS, originally feasts in honour of Bacchus: drunken revels.--_n._
BACCHAN[=A]'LIANISM.--_n._ and _adj._ BACCHANT (bak'kant), a priest of
Bacchus, the god of wine: a reveller: a drunkard.--_n._ BACCHANTE
(bak-kant', bak'kant, bak-kant'i), a priestess of Bacchus, the god of wine:
a female bacchanal:--_pl._ BACCHANT'ES.--_adj._ BACCHIC (bak'kik), relating
to Bacchus: jovial: drunken. [L. _Bacchanalis_, _Bacchus_, Gr. _Bacchos_,
the god of wine.]

BACCY, BACCO, abbreviations of TOBACCO.

BACHARACH, bak'ar-ak, _n._ an excellent wine named from Bacharach, a town
on the Rhine.

BACHELOR, bach'el-or, _n._ a young knight who followed the banner of
another, as being too young to display his own: an unmarried man: one who
has taken his first degree at a university.--_ns._ BACH'ELORHOOD,
BACH'ELORSHIP; BACH'ELORISM, habit of a bachelor; BACH'ELOR'S-BUT'TON, the
popular name of the double-flowered yellow or white varieties of
buttercup.--KNIGHT BACHELOR, title of one who has been knighted, but not
attached to any special order. [O. Fr. _bacheler_. Ety. disputed; acc. to
Brachet from Low L. _baccalarius_, a farm-servant, orig. a cowherd, from
_bacca_, Low L. for _vacca_, a cow.]

BACILLUS, ba-sil'us, _n._ properly the name of a distinct genus of
Schizomycetes, but popularly used in the same sense as BACTERIUM:--_pl._
BACIL'L[=I].--_adjs._ BACIL'LAR, BACIL'LARY, of the shape or nature of a
bacillus, consisting of little rods.--_n._ BACIL'LICIDE, that which
destroys bacilli.--_adj._ BACIL'LIFORM. [Low L. _bacillus_, dim. of
_baculus_, a rod.]

BACK, bak, _n._ a brewer's or dyer's tub or trough. [Dut. _bak_.]

BACK, bak, _n._ the hinder part of the body in man, and the upper part in
beasts, extending from the neck and shoulders to the extremity of the
backbone: put for the whole body in speaking of clothes: the hinder part,
or the part opposite to the front side: the convex part of a book, opposite
to the opening of the leaves: the thick edge of a knife or the like: the
upright hind part of a chair: the surface of the sea, or of a river: the
keel and keelson of a ship: (_football_) one of the players stationed
behind the 'forwards,' the full back's duty being merely to guard the goal:
(_mining_) that side of an inclined mineral lode which is nearest the
surface of the ground--the _back_ of a level is the ground between it and
the level above.--_adv._ to the place from which one came: to a former
state or condition: behind: behind in time: in return: again.--_v.t._ to
get upon the back of: to help, as if standing at one's back: to force back:
to support one's opinion by a wager or bet--'to back a horse,' to bet money
on his winning in a race, 'to back the field,' to bet upon all the horses
in a field, against one in particular: to countersign a warrant, or indorse
a cheque or bill; to write or print at the back of, as a parliamentary
bill, or the like: to put or propel backward, or in the opposite direction,
by reversing the action, as of an engine or a boat--hence the phrases, TO
BACK THE OARS, TO BACK WATER.--_v.i._ to move or go back.--_n._ BACK'-BAND,
a broad strap or chain passing over the cart saddle, and serving to keep up
the shafts of a vehicle.--_v.t._ BACK'BITE, to speak evil of any one behind
his back or in his absence.--_ns._ BACK'BITER; BACK'BITING; BACK'-BOARD, a
board placed at the back of a cart, boat, &c.: a board fastened across the
back to straighten the figure; BACK'BOND (_Scots law_), a deed attaching a
qualification or condition to the terms of a conveyance or other
instrument--used when particular circumstances render it necessary to
express in a separate form the limitations or qualifications of a right;
BACK'BONE, the bone of the back, the vertebral column: the main support of
anything: mainstay: firmness, reliableness; BACK'-DOOR, a door in the back
part of a building: (_attrib._) unworthily secret: clandestine.--_adj._
BACKED, as in humpbacked.--_ns._ BACK'-END, the later part of a season: the
late autumn; BACK'ER, one who backs or supports another in a contest: one
who bets on a horse or the like; BACK'-FALL, a fall on the back in
wrestling--also figuratively: a lever in the coupler of an organ;
BACK'FRIEND (_obs._), a pretended friend: a backer, a friend who stands at
one's back; BACK'GROUND, ground at the back: a place of obscurity: the
space behind the principal figures of a picture; BACK'-HAIR, the long hair
at the back of a woman's head; BACK'-HAND, the hand turned backwards in
making a stroke: handwriting with the letters sloped backwards.--_adj._
BACK'-HAND'ED, with the hand turned backward (as of a blow):
indirect.--_ns._ BACK'-HAND'ER, a blow with the back of the hand: an extra
glass of wine out of turn, the bottle being passed back; BACK'ING, support
at the back: mounting of a horse: the action of putting back: a body of
helpers: anything used to form a back or line the back; BACK'ING-DOWN,
shirking; BACK'-LASH, the jarring reaction of a wheel in a machine when the
motion is not uniform; BACK'-LOG, a log at the back of a fire.--_adj._
BACK'MOST, farthest to the back.--_ns._ BACK'-PIECE, BACK'-PLATE, a piece
or plate of armour for the back; BACK'-SET, a setting back, reverse: an
eddy or counter-current; BACK'SIDE, the back or hinder side or part of
anything: the hinder part of an animal; BACK'-SIGHT, in surveying, a sight
taken backwards: the sight of a rifle nearer the stock; BACK'-SLANG, slang
in which every word is pronounced backwards.--_v.t._ BACKSLIDE', to slide
or fall back in faith or morals:--_pa.p._ backslid', or
backslid'den.--_ns._ BACKSLID'ER; BACKSLID'ING.--_n.pl._ BACK'STAIRS, back
or private stairs of a house.--_adj._ secret or underhand.--_n.pl._
BACK'STAYS, ropes or stays extending from the topmast-heads to the sides of
a ship, and slanting a little backward, to second the shrouds in supporting
the mast when strained by a weight of sail in a fresh wind: any stay or
support at the back.--_ns._ BACK'STITCH, a method of sewing in which, for
every new stitch, the needle enters behind, and comes out in front of, the
end of the previous one; BACK'SWORD, a sword with a back or with only one
edge: a stick with a basket-handle; BACKSWORD'MAN (_Shak._); BACK'-WASH, a
backward current.--_v.t._ to affect with back-wash: to clean the oil from
wool after combing.--_n._ BACK'WATER, water held back in a mill-stream or
river by the obstruction of a dam below--a pool or belt of water connected
with a river, but not in the line of its course or current: water thrown
back by the turning of a water-wheel: a backward current of water: the
swell of the sea formed by the paddles of a steamship.--_n.pl._ BACK'WOODS,
the forest or uncultivated part of a country beyond the cleared country, as
in North American BACKWOODS'MAN.--BACK! go back, turn back
(_imperatively_).--AT THE BACK OF (in U.S. often BACK OF), in support or
pursuit; ON, UPON THE BACK OF, weighing down as a burden.--TO AND BACK
(_Shak._), forward and backward.--TO BACK DOWN, to abandon one's opinion or
position; TO BACK OUT, to recede from an engagement or promise; TO BACK UP,
to give support to; TO BE ON ONE'S BACK, to have come to the end of one's
resources; TO BREAK THE BACK OF, to overburden, to complete the hardest
part of a task; TO CAST BEHIND THE BACK (_B._), to forgive; TO SET or PUT
UP THE BACK, to arouse to resentment; TO THE BACKBONE, thoroughly. [A.S.
_bæc_, Sw. _bak_, Dan. _bag_.]

BACKARE, BACCARE, bak'[=a]re, _interj._ (_Shak._) back! stand back! [Perh.
for _back there!_]

BACKET, bak'et (_Scot._), _n._ a shallow wooden trough for carrying ashes,
coals, &c. [Fr. _baquet_, dim. of _bac_, back.]

BACKGAMMON, bak-gam'un, _n._ a game played by two persons on a board with
dice and fifteen men or pieces each. [M.E. _gamen_, play; and named from
the fact that the pieces are sometimes taken up and obliged to go
_back_--that is, re-enter at the table. Always called _Tables_ till the
17th century.]

BACKSHEESH, BACKSHISH, bak'sh[=e]sh, _n._ a gift or present of money in the
East, a gratuity or tip. [Pers.]

BACKWARD, bak'ward, _adv._ towards the back: on the back: towards the past:
from a better to a worse state: in a direction opposite to the normal--also
BACK'WARDS.--_adj._ BACK'WARD, keeping back: unwilling: slow: late: dull or
stupid.--_n._ the past portion of time.--_n._ BACK'WARDATION, percentage
paid by a seller of stock for keeping back its delivery till the following
account.--_adv._ BACK'WARDLY.--_n._ BACK'WARDNESS.--BACKWARD AND FORWARD,
to and fro.--TO RING BELLS BACKWARD, to ring them, beginning with the bass
bell, in order to give tidings of dismay. [BACK, and affix WARD, WARDS, in
the direction of.]

BACON, b[=a]'kn, _n._ swine's flesh salted or pickled and dried: (_Shak._)
a rustic, 'chaw-bacon.'--TO SAVE or SELL ONE'S BACON, i.e. one's own flesh
or body. [O. Fr. _bacon_, of Teut. origin; cf. Old High Ger. _bahho_,
_bacho_; Ger. _bache_.]

BACONIAN, bak-[=o]n'i-an, _adj._ pertaining to Lord Bacon (1561-1626), or
to his philosophy, which was inductive or based on experience.

BACTERIUM, bak-t[=e]'ri-um, _n._, BACTERIA, bak-t[=e]'ri-a, _n.pl._
Schizomycetes, extremely small, single-celled, fungoid plants, single or
grouped, reproducing rapidly by cross division or by the formation of
spores, almost always associated with the decomposition of albuminoid
substances, and regarded as the germs or active cause of many
diseases.--_ns._ BACTERIOL'OGIST; BACTERIOL'OGY, the scientific study of
bacteria. [Gr. _bakt[=e]rion_, dim. of _baktron_, stick, staff.]

BACULINE, bak'[=u]-l[=i]n, _adj._ pertaining to the stick or cane--in
flogging. [L. _baculum_.]

BACULITE, bak'[=u]-l[=i]t, _n._ a genus of fossil shells, allied to the
ammonites, having a shell of perfectly straight form, tapering to a point.
[L. _baculum_, a stick.]

BAD, bad, _adj._ ill or evil: wicked: hurtful: incorrect, faulty:
unfavourable: painful:--_comp._ WORSE; _superl._ WORST.--_adj._ BAD'DISH,
somewhat bad: not very good.--_adv._ BAD'LY.--_ns._ BAD'NESS.--BAD BLOOD,
angry feeling; BAD COIN, false coin; BAD DEBTS, debts that cannot be
recovered; BAD SHOT, a wrong guess.--TO GO BAD, to decay; TO GO TO THE BAD,
to go to ruin; TO THE BAD, to a bad condition: in deficit.--WITH BAD GRACE,
unwillingly. [Ety. very obscure. The M. E. _badde_ is referred by Zupitza
to A.S. _bæddel_, a hermaphrodite, _bædling_, an effeminate fellow.]

BADE, bad, _pa.t._ of BID.

BADGE, baj, _n._ a mark or sign by which a person or object is known or
distinguished. [M.E. _bage_--Low L. _bagia_, _bagea_, connected by Skeat
with Low L. _baga_, a golden ring, from L. _bacca_, _baca_, a berry, also
the link of a chain.]

BADGER, baj'[.e]r, _n._ a burrowing, nocturnal, hibernating animal about
the size of a fox, eagerly hunted by dogs.--_v.t._ to pursue with
eagerness, as dogs hunt the badger: to pester or worry.--_ns._
BADG'ER-BAIT'ING, the sport of setting dogs to draw out a badger from its
hole; BADG'ER-DOG, a long-bodied and short-legged dog used in drawing the
badger--the Ger. _dachshund_.--_adj._ BADG'ER-LEGGED, having legs of
unequal length, as the badger was vulgarly supposed to have.--_adv._
BADG'ERLY, like a badger: grayish-haired, elderly.--TO OVERDRAW ONE'S
BADGER, to overdraw one's banking account. [Prob. from BADGE and suffix
-ARD, in reference to the white mark borne like a badge on its forehead.
Derivations connecting the word with O. Fr. _blaier_, thus meaning 'little
corn hoarder,' in allusion to a popular notion about the animal's habits,
seem to be erroneous.]

BADINAGE, bad'in-äzh, _n._ light playful talk: banter. [Fr.
_badinage_--_badin_, playful or bantering.]

BADMINTON, bad'min-ton, _n._ a cooling summer drink compounded of claret,
sugar, and soda-water: a predecessor of lawn-tennis, played with
shuttlecocks. [From _Badminton_ in Gloucester, a seat of the Duke of
Beaufort.]

BAFF, bäf, _v.t._ (_golf_) to strike the ground with a club in playing, and
so to send the ball up in the air.

BAFFLE, baf'fl, _v.t._ to check or make ineffectual: (_obs._) to cheat,
hoodwink, bewilder, bring to nought: (_obs._) to disgrace publicly.--_ns._
BAF'FLE (_obs._), confusion, check; BAF'FLER, a bewilderer, confounder.--TO
BAFFLE OUT OF (_obs._), to juggle out of anything. [Prob. Scotch and
connected with _bauchle_; but cf. Fr. _beffler_, from O. Fr. _befe_,
mockery. Paul Meyer suggests a derivation from Prov. _baf_, interj. of
disdain.]

BAFT, baft, _n._ a coarse fabric, originally Oriental, now manufactured in
and shipped from England. [Pers. _baft_, woven.]

BAFT, baft, _n._ _adv._ and _prep._ behind, in the rear (mostly _naut._).
[A.S. _beæftan_, from _be_, by, and _æftan_, behind.]

BAG, bag, _n._ a sack, pouch: specially the silken pouch to contain the
back-hair of the wig: a measure of quantity for produce: a game-bag, i.e.
the quantity of fish or game secured: an udder: (_vulg._ in _pl._)
trousers.--_v.i._ to bulge, swell out: (_naut._) to drop away from the
right course.--_v.t._ to cram full: to put into a bag, specially of game,
hence to kill game, to seize, steal:--_pr.p._ bag'ging; _pa.p._
bagged.--_ns._ BAG'GING, cloth or material for bags; BAG'GIT, a salmon that
has just spawned.--_adj._ BAG'GY, loose like a bag: inflated,
verbose.--_ns._ BAG'MAN, a familiar name for a commercial traveller;
BAG'-WIG, an 18th-cent. wig, the back-hair of which was enclosed in an
ornamental bag.--BAG AND BAGGAGE, originally a military expression, hence
the phrase, 'to march out with bag and baggage,' i.e. with all belongings
saved: to make an honourable retreat: now used in the sense of 'to clear
out completely.'--BAG OF BONES, an emaciated living being.--IN THE BOTTOM
OF THE BAG, remaining as a last resource; THE WHOLE BAG OF TRICKS, every
expedient; TO GIVE ONE THE BAG TO HOLD, to engage any one and meanwhile
disappear; TO LET THE CAT OUT OF THE BAG, to disclose the secret. [M. E.
_bagge_, perh. Scand.; not Celtic, as Diez suggests.]

BAGASSE, ba-gas', _n._ refuse in sugar-making. [Fr.; Sp. _bagazo_, husks of
grapes or olives after pressing.]

BAGATELLE, bag-a-tel', _n._ a trifle: a piece of music in a light style: a
game played on a board (7 feet long and 21 inches broad) with nine balls
and a cue, the object being to put the balls down into as many numbered
holes at the farther semicircular end of the board. [Fr.--It. _bagatella_,
a conjurer's trick, a trifle.]

BAGGAGE, bag'[=a]j, _n._ the tents, provisions, and other necessaries of an
army: (_U.S._) traveller's luggage; a worthless woman: a saucy woman. [O.
Fr. _bagage_--_baguer_, to bind up, from which we may infer all the
meanings, without reference to Fr. _bagasse_, It. _bagáscia_, a strumpet.]

BAGNIO, ban'y[=o], _n._ a bath, esp. one with hot baths: an Oriental place
of detention: a stew or house of ill-fame. [It. _bagno_--L. _balneum_, a
bath.]

[Illustration]

BAGPIPE, bag'p[=i]p, _n._ a musical wind-instrument, consisting of a
leathern bag fitted with pipes. The Highland bagpipe has five pipes: _a_,
the mouthpiece, to keep the bag filled with air; _b_, the chanter, having a
reed and finger-holes to produce the melody; and _c_, three drones with
reeds, tuned to act as a bass to the chanter: (_pl._) an inflated,
senseless talker.--_n._ BAG'PIPER.

BAH, bä, _interj._ an exclamation of disgust or contempt. [Fr.]

BAHADUR, ba-had'[=oo]r, _n._ a title of respect often added by natives to
the names of English officers in India. [Hind. _bahadur_, brave.]

BAIGNOIRE, b[=a]n'war, _n._ a box at the theatre on a level with the
stalls. [Orig. = 'bathing-box,' Fr. _baigner_, to bathe.]

BAIL, b[=a]l, _n._ one who procures the release of an accused person by
becoming guardian or security for his appearing in court: the security
given: (_Spens._) jurisdiction.--_v.t._ to set a person free by giving
security for him: to release on the security of another.--_adj._
BAIL'ABLE.--_ns._ BAIL'-BOND, a bond given by a prisoner and his surety
upon being bailed; BAIL'-DOCK, BALE'-DOCK, a room at the Old Bailey,
London, in which prisoners were kept during the trials; BAILEE', one to
whom goods are delivered in trust upon a contract; BAIL'ER, one who
delivers goods to another in trust; BAIL'MENT, a delivery of goods in
trust: the action of bailing a prisoner; BAILS'MAN, one who gives bail for
another.--TO ACCEPT, ADMIT TO, ALLOW BAIL, are all said of the magistrate;
the prisoner OFFERS, SURRENDERS TO HIS BAIL; the one who provides it GOES,
GIVES, or STANDS BAIL.--TO GIVE LEG BAIL, to be beholden to one's legs for
escape. [O. Fr. _bail_, jurisdiction--_baillier_, to control, deliver.
Primarily implying 'custody' or 'charge,' the word became associated with
Norm. Fr. _bailler_, to deliver--L. _bajulus_.]

BAIL, b[=a]l, _v.t._ (_rare_) to confine.--TO BAIL UP (_Australia_), to
secure a cow's head during milking: to disarm travellers so as to be able
to rob them without resistance. [Prob. conn. with the preceding word.]

BAIL, b[=a]l, _n._ palisades, barriers: a pole separating horses in an open
stable. [M. E.--O. Fr. _baile_, perh. from _baillier_, to enclose. Others
suggest a derivation from L. _baculum_, a stick.]

BAIL, b[=a]l, _n._ one of the cross pieces on the top of the wicket in
cricket.--_n._ BAIL'ER, a ball bowled so as to hit the bails. [Prob. conn.
with the preceding word.]

BAIL, b[=a]l, _v.t._ to clear (a boat) of water with bails or shallow
buckets.--_n._ a man or instrument for bailing water out of a ship, pit,
&c.--Also spelled BALE. [Fr. _baille_, a bucket, perh. from Low L.
_bacula_, dim. of _baca_.]

BAILEY, b[=a]l'i, _n._ the outer court of a feudal castle: either of the
two courts formed by the spaces between the circuits of walls, hence OUTER
and INNER BAILEY.--THE OLD BAILEY in London, the Central Criminal Court,
from the ancient _bailey_ between Lud Gate and New Gate. [Fr. _baille_,
from Low L. _ballium_.]

BAILIE, b[=a]l'i, _n._ a municipal officer in Scotland corresponding to an
English alderman: (_obs._) a sheriff's officer; but cf. Scotch
WAT'ER-BAIL'IES, constables employed to carry out the Tweed Fisheries Acts:
(_obs._) the chief magistrate of a Scottish barony or part of a county,
with functions like a sheriff's. [O. Fr. _bailli_, land-steward, officer of
justice. See BAILIFF.]

BAILIFF, b[=a]l'if, _n._ formerly any king's officer, e.g. sheriffs,
mayors, &c., but applied specially to the chief officer of a hundred, still
the title of the chief magistrate of various towns (e.g. High-bailiff of
Westminster, cf. Bailiff of Dover Castle, also the _bailly_ or first civil
officer of the Channel Islands: a sheriff's officer: an agent or
land-steward.--_n._ BAIL'IWICK, the jurisdiction of a bailiff. [O. Fr.
_baillif_--Low L. _bajulivus_--_bajalus_, carrier, administrator. See
BAIL.]

BAIRAM, b[=i]'ram, _n._ the name of two Mohammedan festivals--the _Lesser
Bairam_ lasting three days, after the feast of Ramadan, and the _Greater
Bairam_ seventy days later, lasting four days. [Pers.]

BAIRN, b[=a]rn, _n._ (_Scot._) a child.--_adj._ BAIRN'-LIKE.--_ns._
BAIRN'TEAM, BAIRN'TIME, brood of children. [A.S. _bearn_--_beran_, to
bear.]

BAISEMAIN, b[=a]z'mang, _n._ (_obs._) mostly in _pl._, compliment paid by
kissing the hand. [Fr. _baiser_, to kiss, and _main_, hand.]

BAIT, b[=a]t, _n._ food put on a hook to allure fish or make them bite: any
allurement or temptation: a refreshment taken on a journey, or the time
taken up by such.--_v.t._ to set food as a lure: to give refreshment on a
journey: to set dogs on a bear, badger, &c.: to worry, persecute,
harass.--_v.i._ to take refreshment on a journey. [M. E. _beyten_--Scand.
_beita_, to make to bite, causal of _bíta_, to bite.]

BAIZE, b[=a]z, _n._ a coarse woollen cloth with a long nap, used mainly for
coverings, linings, &c., but in some countries for clothing. [Fr. _baies_,
_pl._ of _bai_--L. _badius_, bay-coloured.]

BAJAN. See BEJAN.

BAKE, b[=a]k, _v.t._ to dry, harden, or cook by the heat of the sun or of
fire: to prepare bread or other food in an oven: to harden as by
frost.--_v.i._ to work as a baker: to become firm through heat.--_pa.p._
baked (b[=a]kt); _pr.p._ b[=a]k'ing.--_ns._ BAKE'HOUSE, a house or place
used for baking in; BAKE'MEAT (_B._), pastry, pies.--_pa.p._ BAK'EN =
_baked_.--_ns._ BAK'ER, one who bakes bread, &c.--(_obs._) BAX'TER;
BAK'ERY, a bakehouse; BAKE'STONE, a flat stone or plate of iron on which
cakes are baked in the oven; BAK'ING, the process by which bread is baked:
the quantity baked at one time. [A.S. _bacan_; cog. with Ger. _backen_, to
bake, Gr. _phog-ein_, to roast.]

BAKSHEESH. See BACKSHEESH.

BALAAM, b[=a]'lam, _n._ a prophet who strives to mislead, like Balaam in
Numb. xxii.-xxiv.: unimportant paragraphs kept in readiness to fill up a
newspaper.--_ns._ B[=A]'LAAM-BOX, or -BAS'KET, a place in which paragraphs
such as the foregoing are kept in readiness; B[=A]'LAAMITE.--_adj._
B[=A]LAAMIT'ICAL.

BALANCE, bal'ans, _n._ an instrument for weighing, usually formed of two
dishes or scales hanging from a beam supported in the middle: act of
weighing two things: equality or just proportion of weight or power, as the
balance of power: the sum required to make the two sides of an account
equal, hence the surplus, or the sum due on an account: what is needed to
produce equilibrium, a counterpoise: (_watchmaking_) a contrivance which
regulates the speed of a clock or watch.--_v.t._ to weigh in a balance: to
counterpoise: to compare: to settle, as an account, to examine and test
accounts in book-keeping, to make the debtor and creditor sides of an
account agree.--_v.i._ to have equal weight or power, &c.: to hesitate or
fluctuate.--_p.adj._ BAL'ANCED, poised so as to preserve equilibrium: well
arranged, stable.--_ns._ BAL'ANCER, an acrobat; BAL'ANCE-SHEET, a sheet of
paper showing a summary and balance of accounts; BAL'ANCE-WHEEL, a wheel in
a watch or chronometer which regulates the beat or rate. [Fr.--L. _bilanx_,
having two scales--_bis_, double, _lanx_, _lancis_, a dish or scale.]

BALANUS. See ACORN-SHELL.

BALAS, bal'as, _n._ a variety of the spinel ruby. [O. Fr. _balais_ (It.
_balascio_)--Low L. _balascus_--Pers. _Badakhsh[=a]n_, a place near
Samarcand where they are found.]

BALATA, bal'a-ta, _n._ the gum of the bullet or bully tree of South
America, used as a substitute for gutta-percha in insulating
telegraph-wires.

BALBUTIENT, bal-b[=u]'shi-ent, _adj._ stammering. [L.
_balbutiens_--_balb[=u]t[=i]re_, to stutter.]

BALCONY, balk'on-i (18th c., bal-k[=o]'ni), _n._ a stage or platform
projecting from the wall of a building within or without, supported by
pillars or consoles, and surrounded with a balustrade or railing: in
theatres, usually the gallery immediately above the dress circle.--_n._
BAL'CONETTE, a miniature balcony.--_adj._ BAL'CONIED. [It.
_balc[=o]ne_--_balco_, of Teut. origin; Old High Ger. _balcho_ (Ger.
_balken_), Eng. BALK.]

BALD, bawld, _adj._ without hair (feathers, &c.) on the head (or on other
parts of the body): bare, unadorned, destitute of literary grace: paltry,
trivial: undisguised.--_ns._ BALD'-COOT, popular name for the coot, from
its pure white wide frontal plate: a monk--also BALD'ICOOT; BALD'-EA'GLE, a
common but inaccurate name for the American white-headed eagle, used as the
national emblem.--_adj._ BALD'-FACED, having white on the face, as a
horse.--_n._ BALD'HEAD, a person bald on the head.--_adjs._ BALD'-HEADED;
BALD'ISH, somewhat bald.--_adv._ BALD'LY.--_ns._ BALD'NESS; BALD'PATE, one
destitute of hair: a kind of wild-duck.--_adjs._ BALD'PATE, BALD'PATED,
destitute of hair. [Orig. 'shining,' 'white,' Ir. and Gael. _bàl_, 'white'
spot; but perh. conn. with _ball_ in the sense of 'rounded,' whence
'smooth,' 'hairless.']

BALDACHIN, bal'da-kin, _n._ silk brocade: a canopy, either supported on
pillars, or fastened to the wall, over a throne, pulpit, or altar, &c.: in
R.C. processions, a canopy borne over the priest who carries the Host. [It.
_baldacchino_, Fr. _baldaquin_, a canopy, from It. _Baldacco_, Bagdad,
whence was brought the stuff of which they were made.]

BALDERDASH, bawl'd[.e]r-dash, _n._ idle senseless talk: anything jumbled
together without judgment: obscene language or writing. [Ety. dub.; but cf.
the prov. Eng. _balder_, to use coarse language, Dut. _balderen_, to roar.
Some adduce Welsh _baldorrdus_--_baldordd_, idle noisy talk.]

BALDMONEY, bawld'mun-i, _n._ popular name for several kinds of Gentian.
[Ety. quite unknown.]

BALDRICK, bawld'rik, _n._ a warrior's belt or shoulder-sash: (_Spens._) the
zodiac, being regarded as a gem-studded belt. [O. Fr. _baldrei_ (Mid. High
Ger. _balderich_, girdle)--Low L. _baldringus_, perh. from L. _balteus_.]

BALE, b[=a]l, _n._ a bundle, or package of goods: (_obs._) the set of dice
for any special game.--_v.t._ to make into bales. [M. E. _bale_, perh. from
O. Fr. _bale_--Old High Ger. _balla_, _palla_, ball. See BALL.]

BALE, b[=a]l, _v.t._ to throw out water [See BAIL.]

BALE, b[=a]l, _n._ evil, injury, mischief: misery: woe.--_adj._ BALE'FUL,
full of misery, destructive: full of sorrow, sad.--_adv._ BALE'FULLY.--_n._
BALE'FULNESS.--BLISS AND BALE are often alliteratively opposed; also BOOT
AND BALE. [A.S. _bealu_; Old High Ger. _balo_; Ice. _böl_.]

BALE, b[=a]l, _n._ (_arch._--_Morris_) a fire, funeral pyre: (_Scot._) a
beacon-fire.--_n._ BALE'-FIRE, a blazing fire: a beacon-fire: a bonfire.
Spenser confounds with BALE, woe. [A.S. _bæl_; Scand. _bál_; cog. with Gr.
_phalos_, bright. See BELTANE.]

BALEEN, b[=a]-l[=e]n', _n._ the whalebone of commerce. [Fr.--L. _balæna_,
whale.]

[Illustration]

BALISTRARIA, bal-is-tr[=a]r'i-a, _n._ an aperture or loophole in the wall
of a fortification through which crossbowmen might discharge their
bolts.--_n._ BAL'ISTER (_obs._), name for an arbalester or crossbowman,
also an arbalest or crossbow itself. [Low L. _ballistrarius_, _balistra_, a
variant form of _ballista_, a crossbow.]

BALK, BAULK, bawk, _n._ a ridge left unploughed, intentionally or through
carelessness: (_obs._) an omission: squared timber: a tie-beam of a house,
stretching from wall to wall, esp. when laid so as to form a loft, 'the
balks:' (_obs._) the beam of a balance: the rope by which fishing-nets are
fastened together: a hindrance or disappointment.--_v.t._ to ignore, pass
over: refuse: avoid: let slip: to check, disappoint, or elude: to meet
arguments with objections.--_v.i._ to swerve, pull up: (_Spens._) lie out
of the way.--_n._ BALK'-LINE, in billiards, a line drawn across the table
28½ inches from the face of the bottom cushion--a ball is said to be in
balk when within this space. [A.S. _balca_, ridge; Old High Ger. _balcho_.]

BALL, bawl, _n._ anything round: any celestial body, esp. the 'globe:' the
golden orb borne with the sceptre as the emblem of sovereignty: a globular
body to play with in tennis, football, golf, billiards, &c.: any rounded
protuberant part of the body: a bullet, or any missile thrown from an
engine of war: a rounded mass of anything: a throw or delivery of the ball
at cricket: a well-known game played with a ball.--_v.i._ to gather itself
into a ball, become clogged.--_ns._ BALL'-CART'RIDGE, a cartridge
containing both powder and ball [BALL and CARTRIDGE]; BALL'-COCK, the
stopcock of a cistern, attached to one end of a lever, at the other end of
which is a hollow metal ball which rises and falls with the [Illustration]
water, thus regulating the supply; BALL'-FLOW'ER, an ornament of the
decorated style of Gothic architecture, resembling a ball placed in a
circular flower.--_adj._ BALL'-PROOF, proof against balls discharged from
firearms.--BALL AND SOCKET, a joint formed of a ball partly enclosed in a
cup, thus insuring great strength; BALL OF THE EYE, the eye within the lids
and socket.--NO BALL, a ball unfairly bowled.--THREE GOLDEN or BRASS BALLS,
the sign of a pawnbroker.--TO HAVE THE BALL AT ONE'S FEET, to have a thing
in one's power; TO KEEP THE BALL UP or ROLLING, to keep from flagging; TO
TAKE UP THE BALL, to take one's turn in anything.--WIDE BALL, one out of
the batsman's reach. [M. E. _bal_, Scand. _böllr_; cog. with Old High Ger.
_ballo_, _pallo_.]

BALL, bawl, _n._ an entertainment of dancing.--_n._ BALL'ROOM.--TO OPEN THE
BALL, to begin the dancing, to begin operations. [O. Fr. _bal_, _baller_,
to dance--Low L. _ballare_, referred by some to Gr. _ballizein_.]

BALLAD, bal'lad, _n._ a simple spirited narrative poem in short stanzas of
two or four lines, in which a story is told in straightforward verse, often
with great elaborateness and detail in incident, but always with graphic
simplicity and force--a sort of minor epic: a simple song, usually of a
romantic or sentimental nature, in two or more verses, each sung to the
same melody, as in the so-called Ballad Concerts: any popular song, often
scurrilous.--_ns._ BAL'LADIST, a writer or singer of ballads;
BAL'LAD-MONGER, a dealer in ballads. [Fr. _ballade_, from _ballare_, to
dance, being orig. a song sung to the rhythmic movement of a dancing
chorus--a dramatic poem sung or acted in the dance, of which a shadow
survives in the ring-songs of our children.]

BALLADE, ba-lad', _n._ a poem of one or more terns or triplets of seven or
eight lined stanzas, each ending with the same line as refrain, and usually
an envoy: now frequently used of any poem in stanzas of equal
length.--BALLADE ROYAL, stanzas of seven or eight lines of ten
syllables--called also _Rime_ or _Rhythm royal_. [An earlier spelling of
BALLAD.]

BALLADINE, bal'a-d[=e]n, _n._ a female public dancer. [Fr.]

BALLAST, bal'last, _n._ heavy matter employed to give a ship sufficient
immersion in the water, to insure her safe sailing with spread canvas, when
her cargo and equipment are too light: that which renders anything
steady.--_v.t._ to load with ballast: to make or keep steady: (_Shak._)
load.--_n._ BAL'LAST-HEAV'ER. [Probably the Old Sw. _barlast_--_bar_, bare,
and _last_, load, the mere load.]

BALLERINA, bal-ler-[=e]n'a, _n._ a female dancer:--_pl._ BALLERINE
(bal-ler-in'), BALLERIN'AS. [It.]

BALLET, bal'l[=a], _n._ a theatrical exhibition composed of dancing,
posturing, and pantomimic action: (_obs._) a dance. [Fr.; dim. of _bal_, a
dance.]

BALLISTA, BALISTA, bal-lis'ta, _n._ a Roman military engine in the form of
a crossbow, which, like the _catapulta_ and the _onager_, propelled large
and heavy missiles, chiefly through the reaction of a tightly twisted rope,
or else by a violent movement of levers.--_adj._ BALLIS'TIC,
projectile.--_ns._ BALLIS'TIC-PEN'DULUM, an instrument for ascertaining the
velocity of military projectiles; BALLIS'TITE, an improved kind of
gunpowder. [L.--Gr. _ballein_, to throw.]

BALLIUM, bal'li-um, _n._ the Low L. form of BAILEY.

BALLOON, bal-l[=oo]n', _n._ an inflated air-tight envelope of paper or
silk, constructed to float in the air and carry a considerable weight when
filled with heated air or light gas: anything inflated, empty: (_obs._) a
game played with a large inflated ball.--_v.i._ to ascend in a balloon: to
puff out like a balloon.--_n._ BALLOON'IST, an aeronaut. [It. _ballone_,
augmentative of _balla_, ball.]

BALLOT, bal'ut, _n._ a little ball or ticket used in voting: a method of
secret voting by putting a ball or ticket into an urn or box.--_v.i._ to
vote by ballot: to select by secret voting (with _for_): draw lots
for:--_pr.p._ bal'loting; _pa.p._ bal'loted.--_ns._ BAL'LOTAGE, in France,
the second ballot to decide which of two candidates has come nearest to the
legal majority; BAL'LOT-BOX, a box to receive balls or tickets when voting
by ballot. [It. _ballotta_, dim. of _balla_, ball. See BALL.]

BALM, bäm, _n._ an aromatic substance: a fragrant and healing ointment:
aromatic fragrance: anything that heals or soothes pain: a tree yielding
balm: name of some fragrant garden herbs.--_v.t._ (_arch._) to embalm:
(_Shak._) to anoint with fragrant oil: (_arch._) to soothe.--_n._
BALM'INESS.--_adj._ BALM'Y, fragrant: mild and soothing: bearing
balm.--BALM, or BALSAM, OF GILEAD, the resin of the tree _Balsamodendron
Gileadense_, formerly esteemed as an antiseptic, the name originating in
the belief that this is the substance mentioned in the Bible as found in
Gilead, and called in the English translation 'balm.' [O. Fr. _basme_--L.
_balsamum_. See BALSAM.]

BALM-CRICKET, bäm'-krik'et, _n._ (_Tennyson_) a cicada. [Ger. _baum_, a
tree, and CRICKET.]

BALMORAL, bal-mor'al, _n._ a kind of Scotch cap: a figured woollen
petticoat: a kind of boot lacing in front.

BALNEOLOGY, bal-ne-ol'o-ji, _n._ the scientific study of bathing and of
mineral springs. [L. _balneum_, bath.]

BALSAM, bawl'sam, _n._ the common name of a genus of succulent herbaceous
plants: a resinous oily substance generally supposed to be derived from a
species of Balsamodendron, early famous in the East for its fragrance and
medicinal virtues: (_fig._) any healing agent.--_v.t._ to heal: (_rare_)
embalm.--_adjs._ BALSAM'IC, BAL'SAMOUS, having the qualities of balsam:
soothing; BALSAMIF'EROUS, producing balsam; BAL'SAMY, fragrant.--CANADA
BALSAM, a kind of turpentine obtained from the Balm of Gilead fir. [L.
_balsamum_--Gr. _balsamon_; prob. of Semitic origin.]

BALTIMORE, bal'tim-[=o]r, _n._ a finch-like perching bird of the starling
family, very common in North America, called also _Baltimore oriole_,
_Fire-bird_, &c. [From Lord _Baltimore_, whose livery was orange and
black--its colour.]

[Illustration]

BALUSTER, bal'ust-[.e]r, _n._ a small pillar used as a support to the rail
of a staircase, &c.--_adj._ BAL'USTERED.--_n._ BAL'USTRADE, a row of
balusters joined by a rail, forming an ornamental parapet to a balcony, &c.
[Fr. _balustre_--Low L. _balaustium_--Gr. _balaustion_, the flower of the
pomegranate; from the similarity of form.]

BAM, bam, _n._ a slang word for a hoax: a false tale.--_v.t._ to cheat or
hoax. [See BAMBOOZLE.]

BAMBINO, bam-bi'no, _n._ a term in art descriptive of the child Jesus, esp.
of the swaddled figure of the infant Saviour exhibited at Christmas in
Catholic churches. [It., dim. of _bambo_.]

BAMBOO, bam-b[=oo]', _n._ a gigantic Indian reed or grass, with
hollow-jointed stem, and of hard texture. [Malay _bambu_.]

BAMBOOZLE, bam-b[=oo]'zl, _v.t._ to deceive: to confound or mystify.--_n._
BAMBOO'ZLEMENT. [Of cant origin--but not Gipsy; first appears about 1700.]

BAN, ban, _n._ a proclamation: sentence of banishment: outlawry:
anathematisation: a denunciation: a curse.--_v.t._ (_arch._) to curse:
(_prov._) to chide or rail upon: to anathematise: to proscribe. [A.S.
_bannan_, to summon; the noun _bann_ does not appear in A.S. (which has
_gebann_), but is a common Teut. word, as in Old High Ger. and Scand.
_bann_. The O. Fr. _ban_ and Low L. _bannum_ are of the same origin.]

BAN, ban, _n._ the governor of a BANAT, an old name for the military
divisions on the eastern boundaries of the Hungarian kingdom.--_ns._
BANATE, BANNAT. [Pers. _b[=a]n_, lord.]

BANAL, b[=a]n'al, or ban'al, _adj._ commonplace, trivial.--_n._ BANAL'ITY,
triviality. [Fr.]

BANANA, ba-nä'na, _n._ a gigantic herbaceous plant, remarkable for its
nutritious fruit. [Sp. or Port. _banana_, from the native name in Guinea.]

BANBURY, ban'ber-i, _n._ a kind of cake made at _Banbury_, a town in
Oxfordshire.

BANCO, bang'ko, _n._ a commercial term meaning the standard money in which
a bank keeps its accounts, as distinguished from the current money of the
place.--IN BANCO, applied to the sittings of a superior court of common law
as a full court distinguished from sittings at Nisi Prius or on circuit.
[It. See BANK.]

BAND, band, _n._ that by which loose things are held together: (_fig._) a
moral bond of restraint or of obligation: a tie or connecting piece:
(_pl._) shackles, bonds, fetters (_B._): (_arch._) an agreement or promise
given: (_arch._) security given: (_Spens._) a pledge. [M. E. _band_,
_bond_; A.S. _bend_, from _bindan_, to bind. See BIND.]

BAND, band, _n._ a strip of cloth, or the like, to bind round anything, as
a hat-band, waist-band, &c.: a stripe crossing a surface distinguished by
its colour or appearance: the neck-band or collar of a shirt, also the
collar or ruff worn by both sexes in the 17th century (termed a
falling-band later, when turned down over the shoulders): (_pl._) the pair
of linen strips hanging down in front from the collar, worn by some
Protestant clergymen and by English barristers.--_n._ BAND'AGE, a strip or
swathe of cloth used by surgeons to keep a part of the body at rest, to
apply pressure, or to retain dressings or apparatus in position--the two
chief varieties, the roller and the triangular handkerchief bandage: a
piece of cloth used to blindfold the eyes.--_v.t._ to bind with such.--_n._
BAND'BOX, a light kind of box for holding bands, caps, millinery,
&c.--_p.adj._ BAND'ED, fastened as with a band: striped with bands:
leagued, allied.--_ns._ BAND'FISH, a name given to various kinds of fish
with long, thin, flat bodies; BAND'SAW, an endless saw, consisting of a
toothed steel belt; BAND'STER, one who binds the sheaves after the reapers.
[M. E. _bande_--O. Fr. _bande_, of Teut. origin; cf. A.S. _bindan_; Ger.
_binde_, a band, Eng. BIND.]

BAND, band, _n._ a number of persons bound together for any common purpose:
a troop of conspirators, confederates, &c.: a body of musicians, the
company of musicians attached to a particular regiment in the army:
(_Scot._) band = bond.--_v.t._ to bind together.--_v.i._ to associate,
assemble, confederate.--_ns._ BAND'MASTER, the leader of a band of
musicians; BANDS'MAN, a member of a band of musicians; BAND'-STAND, a
platform for accommodating a band of musicians.--BAND OF HOPE, an
association of young persons--often mere infants--pledged to lifelong
abstinence from alcoholic drinks--first instituted about 1847. [Fr.
_bande_, of Teut. origin; cf. BEND, BIND.]

BAND, band, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to ban or banish.

BAND, an obsolete _pa.t._ of BIND.

BANDANA, BANDANNA, ban-dan'a, _n._ a kind of silk or cotton coloured
handkerchief, with a pattern of spots or diamond prints, originally from
India. [Hind. _bandhn[=u]_, the mode of dyeing these, _b[=a]ndh_, a cord.]

BANDEAU, ban'd[=o], _n._ a fillet or narrow band worn by women to bind
their hair:--_pl._ BAN'DEAUX. [Fr.]

BANDELET, band'e-let, _n._ (_archit._) a small flat moulding or fillet
surrounding a column. [Fr. _bandelette_.]

BANDELIER, ban-de-l[=e]r', _n._ a form of BANDOLEER.

BANDEROL, BANDEROLE, ban'de-r[=o]l, _n._ a small banner or streamer, as
that borne on the shaft of a lance: (_archit._) a flat band with an
inscription common in Renaissance buildings. [Fr.]

BANDICOOT, ban'di-k[=oo]t, _n._ a genus of insectivorous marsupials found
in Australia: the largest species of rat, found in India and Ceylon, called
also _Malabar rat_ and _Pig-rat_. [Telegu _pandikokku_, pig-rat.]

BANDIED. See BANDY.

BANDIT, ban'dit, _n._ an outlaw: a robber:--_pl._ BAN'DITS, BANDITT'I. [It.
_bandito_--Low L. _bannire_, _bandire_, to proclaim. See BAN.]

BANDOG, ban'dog, _n._ a dog tied up as a watch-dog, or because of its
ferocity. [BAND, fastening, and DOG.]

BANDOLEER, BANDOLIER, ban-do-l[=e]r', _n._ a leathern belt worn by
musketeers, to which their ammunition was fixed. [O. Fr.
_bandouillere_--It. _bandoliera_, _banda_, a band.]

BANDOLINE, ban'do-lin, _n._ a gummy substance used for stiffening the hair
and keeping it in shape. [Prob. from BAND.]

BANDORE, ban-d[=o]r', _n._ a musical instrument like a guitar, with three
or more strings. [Sp. _bandurria_, Fr. _mandore_; L. _pandura_, Gr.
_pandoura_.]

BANDROL, band'r[=o]l, _n._ Same as BANDEROL.

BANDS, of clergymen and barristers. See BAND (2).

BANDY, ban'di, _n._ a club bent at the end for striking a ball: a game at
ball with such a club (_bandy-ball_ = _hockey_).--_v.t._ to beat to and fro
as with a bandy: to toss from one to another (as words _with_ any one) = to
discuss or debate; to give and take blows or reproaches: (_Shak._) to
fight, strive:--_pa.p._ ban'died.--_n._ BAN'DYING.--_adj._ BAN'DY-LEGGED,
having bandy or crooked legs. [Fr. _bander_, perh. conn. with _bande_, a
side.]

BANE, b[=a]n, _n._ destruction: death: mischief: poison.--_v.t._ (_arch._)
to harm, to poison.--_adj._ BANE'FUL, destructive.--_adv._
BANE'FULLY.--_n._ BANE'FULNESS. [A.S. _bana_, a murderer; Ice. _bani_,
death.]

BANG, bang, _n._ a heavy blow: a sudden loud noise: an explosion.--_v.t._
to beat: to strike violently: to slam, as a door: to make a loud noise: to
beat or surpass, to bounce upon.--_interj._ BANG, used with verbs like
'go,' &c., and in such a phrase as 'bang off.'--_p.adj._ BANG'ING, dealing
blows: overwhelming.--_adj._ BANG'-UP (_slang_), in the height of style or
fashion.--_n._ BANG'STER (_prov._), a braggart, a victor. [Scand. _banga_,
to hammer; cf. Ger. _bengel_, a cudgel.]

BANG, bang, _n._ a woman's hair cut square across the brow.--_p.adj._
BANGED, wearing the hair in such a way.--_n._ BANG'-TAIL, a horse's tail
with the end squared. [An Americanism, doubtless from the phrase 'bang
off.']

BANG. Same as BHANG.

BANGLE, bang'gl, _n._ a ring, bracelet, or anklet.--_adj._ BAN'GLED,
adorned with such. [Hind. _bangr[=i]_.]

BANIAN, BANYAN, ban'yan, _n._ an Indian tree of the fig family, remarkable
for its vast rooting branches: a Hindu trader, esp. from Guzerat, sometimes
loosely applied to all Hindus in Western Asia: a loose flannel jacket or
gown worn in India.--BANIAN DAYS, a sailor's phrase, meaning days on which
no meat is served out, hence days of short commons generally, from the
abstinence from flesh of the Banian merchants. [Port. _banian_, perh.
through Ar. _bany[=a]n_, from Hind. _banya_--Sans. _vanij_, a merchant.]

BANISH, ban'ish, _v.t._ to condemn to exile: to drive away: to expel (with
_from_, _out of_).--_n._ BAN'ISHMENT, exile. [Fr. _bannir_--Low L.
_bannire_, to proclaim. See BAN.]

BANISTER, ban'ist[.e]r, _n._ a corr. of BALUSTER.

BANJO, ban'jo, _n._ a musical instrument of the guitar kind, played with
the fingers, but without frets to guide the stopping, having a long neck, a
body of stretched parchment like a drum, and from five to nine catgut
strings. [Corr. of Fr. _bandore_ or _pandore_--L. _pandura_--Gr.
_pandoura_.]

BANK, bangk, _n._ a mound or ridge of earth: the earthy margin of a river,
lake, &c.: the raised edge of a road, railway cutting, &c.: (_min._) the
surface at the pit-mouth, as in banksman: rising ground in the sea.--_v.t._
to enclose with a bank: to deposit or pile up: to make up a fire by
covering it with a heap of fuel so pressed down as to remain a long time
burning slowly--_banked fires_.--_n._ BANKS'MAN, an overseer at a
pit-mouth.--FROM BANK TO BANK, from the time the collier begins to descend
the pit for his spell of work till he reaches the top again. [M. E.
_banke_, of Scand. origin; cog. with BANK, BENCH.]

BANK, bangk, _n._ a bench in a galley: a tier or rank of oars: the bench on
which judges sat. [O. Fr. _banc_, of Teut. origin, cog. with the foregoing
word.]

BANK, bangk, _n._ a place where money is deposited: an institution for the
keeping, lending, and exchanging, &c. of money: in games of hazard, the
money the proprietor, who plays against all the others, has before
him.--_v.t._ to deposit in a bank, as money.--_ns._ BANK'-[=A]'GENT, the
head of a branch bank; BANK'-BILL, a bill drawn by one bank upon another,
payable at a future date, or on demand; BANK'-CHEQUE, an order to pay
issued upon a bank; BANK'ER, one who keeps a bank: one employed in banking
business:--_fem._ BANK'ERESS; BANK'-HOL'IDAY, a day on which banks are
legally closed, bills falling due on these being payable the following day;
BANK'ING, the business of a banker.--_adj._ pertaining to a bank.--_ns._
BANK'-NOTE, a note issued by a bank, which passes as money, being payable
to bearer on demand; BANK'-PAP'ER, bank-notes in circulation; BANK'-STOCK,
a share or shares in the capital stock of a bank; BRANCH'-BANK, a branch
office of a bank; SAV'INGS-BANK, one intended originally to develop a
spirit of saving amongst the poor.--BANK ANNUITIES, the consolidated three
per cent. annuities--British Government funds.--BANK OF ISSUE, one that
issues its own notes, or promises to pay; JOINT-STOCK BANK, one of which
the capital is subscribed by a large number of shareholders; PRIVATE BANK,
one carried on by any number of persons less than ten.--TO BREAK THE BANK,
to win, as in faro, from the management a certain sum which has been fixed
upon as the limit the bank is willing to lose on any one day; TO PLAY
AGAINST THE BANK, to take the risks of a game against the manager who holds
the bank, as at rouge-et-noir, &c. [Fr. _banque_, of Teut. origin, cog.
with two foregoing words.]

BANKRUPT, bangk'rupt, _n._ one who breaks or fails in business; an
insolvent person.--_adj._ insolvent: destitute (with _of_).--_n._
BANK'RUPTCY, the state of being or act of becoming bankrupt. [Fr.
_banque-route_, It. _banca rotta_.]

BANKSIA, bangk'sia, _n._ a genus of Australian shrubs, named in honour of
Sir Joseph Banks (1744-1820).

BANNER, ban'[.e]r, _n._ a military standard: a flag or ensign bearing some
device, as in processions, &c.--_adj._ BAN'NERED, furnished with banners.
[O. Fr. _banere_--Low L. _bandum_, _bannum_; cog. with BAND and BIND.]

BANNERET, ban'[.e]r-et, _n._ a higher class of knight, inferior to a baron.
[Fr. dim. of BANNER.]

BANNEROL, ban'[.e]r-ol, _n._ Same as BANDEROL.

BANNING, ban'ning, _n._ cursing. [See BAN.]

BANNOCK, ban'nok, _n._ a flat home-made cake of oatmeal, barley, or
pease-meal. [Gael. _bannach_.]

BANNS, banz, _n.pl._ a proclamation of marriage.--TO FORBID THE BANNS, to
make formal objection to a projected marriage. [From BAN.]

BANQUET, bangk'wet, _n._ a feast: any rich treat or entertainment: a course
of sweetmeats, fruit, and wine, separately, or after the principal
meal--still used in the Scotch phrase, 'a cake and wine banquet.'--_v.t._
to give a feast to.--_v.i._ to fare sumptuously.--_ns._ BANQ'UETER,
BANQ'UETEER; BANQ'UETING; BANQ'UETING-HOUSE. [Fr.;--_banc_, bench, like It.
_banchetto_, from _banco_.]

BANQUETTE, bang-ket', _n._ a raised way inside a parapet; the long seat
behind the driver in a French diligence. [Fr.; It. _banchetta_, dim. of
_banca_, seat.]

BANSHEE, ban'sh[=e], _n._ a female fairy in Ireland and elsewhere, who
makes herself known by wailings and shrieks before a death in the
particular family to which she is attached. [Ir. _bean sídhe_, Old Ir. _ben
síde_, woman of the fairies.]

BANTAM, ban'tam, _n._ a small variety of the common domestic fowl, supposed
to be named from _Bantam_ in Java, notable for courage.--_adj._ of
bantam-breed: little and combative.

BANTER, bant'[.e]r, _v.t._ to assail with good-humoured raillery: to joke
or jest at: (_arch._) to impose upon, trick.--_n._ humorous raillery:
jesting.--_ns._ BANT'ERER; BANT'ERING.--_adv._ BANT'ERINGLY.--_adj._
BANT'ERY (_Carlyle_). [Ety. quite unknown.]

BANTING, bant'ing, _n._ a system of diet for reducing superfluous
fat.--_n._ BANT'INGISM. [From W. _Banting_ (1797-1878), a London
cabinetmaker, who recommended it to the public in 1863.]

BANTLING, bant'ling, _n._ a child. [So called from the _bands_ in which it
is wrapped.]

BANTU, ban't[=oo], _n._ a native name sometimes applied to the South
African family of languages and the peoples speaking these, including
Kaffirs and Zulus, Bechuans, and the peoples from the Hottentot country to
the Gulf of Guinea.

BANXRING, bangks'ring, _n._ a small insectivorous animal of Java and
Sumatra. [Jav.]

BANYAN. See BANIAN.

BAOBAB, b[=a]'o-bab, _n._ a magnificent tree, native to tropical Western
Africa, whose trunk is 20 to 30 feet thick, called also the _Monkey-bread
Tree_. [African.]

BAPHOMET, baf'[=o]-m[.e]t, _n._ the alleged name of a mysterious idol the
Templars were accused of worshipping.--_adj._ BAPH'OMETIC. [A medieval
corr. of the name _Mahomet_.]

BAPTISE, bapt-[=i]z', _v.t._ to administer baptism to: to christen, give a
name to.--_n._ BAPT'ISM, immersion in or sprinkling with water as a
religious ceremony--a sign and seal of the covenant of grace. It is
symbolic of spiritual purification, and as a religious rite marks
initiation into the Christian community.--_adj._ BAPTIS'MAL.--_adv._
BAPTIS'MALLY.--_ns._ BAPT'IST, one who baptises: one who approves only of
baptising by immersion, and that only to persons who profess their faith in
Christ; BAP'TISTERY, a place where baptism is administered, either a
separate building or a portion of a church.--BAPTISMAL REGENERATION, the
doctrine of the remission of sin original and actual, and of the new birth
into the life of sanctifying grace, in and through the sacrament of
baptism; BAPTISM BY DESIRE, the grace given to a believer who ardently
desires baptism, but dies before he can receive it; BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD,
the vicarious baptism of a living Christian for an unbaptised dead
Christian, who was thereby accounted baptised and received into bliss--it
is supposed to be alluded to in 1 Cor. xv. 29; BAPTISM OF BLOOD, martyrdom
for Christ's sake; BAPTISM OF FIRE, the gift of the Holy Spirit: martyrdom
by fire for Christ's sake: (_fig._) any trying ordeal to be endured, as a
young soldier's first experience of being under fire; CLINICAL BAPTISM,
baptism administered to sick persons; CONDITIONAL (or HYPOTHETICAL)
BAPTISM, baptism administered to those about whom it is doubtful whether
they were baptised or whether the form of their earlier baptism was valid;
NAME OF BAPTISM, the Christian or personal name given at baptism; PRIVATE
BAPTISM, baptism administered at home, or elsewhere, not in the church.
[Gr. _baptiz-ein_--_bapt-ein_, to dip in water.]

BAR, bär, _n._ a rod of any solid substance: a bolt: a hindrance or
obstruction--the barrier of a city or street, as the bars of York, Temple
Bar, a toll-bar: a bank of sand or other matter at the mouth of a river:
any terminus or limit (of life)--e.g. as in TO CROSS THE BAR: the railing
that encloses a space in a tavern, the counter across which drinks are
served, a public-house: the wooden rail dividing off the JUDGE'S SEAT, at
which prisoners are placed for arraignment or sentence--hence, TO APPEAR AT
THE BAR, TO PASS THE BAR = to be formally referred for trial from a lower
court to a higher: any tribunal: the pleaders in a court as distinguished
from the judges: a division in music.--_v.t._ to fasten or secure, as with
a bar: to hinder or exclude:--_pr.p._ bar'ring; _pa.p._ barred.--_ns._
BAR'-[=I]'RON, iron in malleable bars; BAR'MAID, a female waiter at the bar
of a tavern or hotel.--_prep._ BAR'RING, excepting, saving.--_ns._
BAR'RING-OUT, the shutting of the school-room doors and windows by the
pupils against the master, in order to enforce assent to their demands;
BAR'WOOD, a kind of red dye-wood imported from Africa in bars. [O. Fr.
_barre_--Low L. _barra_, perh. of Celt. origin.]

BARACAN. Same as BARRACAN.

BARAGOUIN, bä-rag-w[=e]n, _n._ any jargon or unintelligible language. [Fr.;
from Bret. _bara_, bread, and _gwîn_, wine, supposed to have originated in
the Breton soldiers' astonishment at white bread.]

BARB, bärb, _n._ the beard-like jag near the point of an arrow, fish-hook,
&c.--_v.t._ to arm with barbs, as an arrow, &c.: to shave, trim, mow, to
pierce, as with a barb.--_adjs._ BARB'ATE (_bot._), bearing a hairy tuft;
BARB'ATED, barbed, bearded.--_n._ BARBE, a term applied by the Waldenses to
their teachers.--_adjs._ BARBED, furnished with a barb: of a horse, armed
or caparisoned with a barb or bard; BARB'ELLATE (_bot._), having barbed or
bearded bristles. [Fr.--L. _barba_, a beard.]

BARB, bärb, _n._ a swift kind of horse, the breed of which came from
_Barbary_ in North Africa.

BARBACAN. See BARBICAN.

BARBAROUS, bär'bar-us, _adj._ uncivilised: rude: savage: brutal.--_adjs._
BAR'BARESQUE, pertaining to _Barbary_: barbarous, esp. in art;
BARB[=A]R'IAN, uncivilised: savage: without taste or refinement:
foreign.--_n._ an uncivilised man, a savage: a cruel, brutal man.--_adj._
BARBAR'IC, foreign: uncivilised.--_n._ BARBARIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._
BAR'BARISE, to make barbarous: to corrupt as a language.--_ns._ BAR'BARISM,
savage life: rudeness of manners: an incorrect form of speech; BARBAR'ITY,
savageness: cruelty.--_adv._ BAR'BAROUSLY.--_n._ BAR'BAROUSNESS. [L.--Gr.
_barbaros_, foreign, lit. stammering, from the unfamiliar sound of foreign
tongues.]

BARBARY APE, bär'bar-i [=a]p, _n._ the magot, or small tailless ape found
in Africa and also on the rock of Gibraltar.

BARBECUE, bärb'e-k[=u], _v.t._ to roast whole, as a pig: to cure flesh by
exposing it on a barbecue.--_n._ a framework on which to dry and smoke meat
above a fire: an animal roasted whole: an open floor on which coffee-beans
and the like are spread out to dry: (_Amer._) a large social or political
entertainment, where the hospitalities are on a lavish scale. [Sp.
_barbacoa_--Haytian _barbacòa_, a framework of sticks set upon posts.]

BARBEL, bärb'el, _n._ a fresh-water fish with beard-like appendages at its
mouth. [O. Fr. _barbel_--Low L. _barbellus_--L. _barba_, a beard.]

BARBER, bärb'[.e]r, _n._ one who shaves beards and dresses hair.--_ns._
BARB'ER-MONG'ER (_Shak._), a man decked out by his barber, a fop;
BARB'ER-SUR'GEON, one who let blood and drew teeth as well as shaved--the
company of Barber-surgeons was incorporated in 1461, but by an act in 1545
barbers were confined to the more humble function.--BARBER'S BLOCK, a round
block on which wigs are made; BARBER'S POLE, the barber's sign in England,
a pole striped spirally with alternate bands of colours, generally red or
black and white, having often a brass basin hung at the end. [Fr.--L.
_barba_, a beard.]

BARBERRY, bär'ber-i, _n._ a thorny shrub with yellow flowers and red
berries, common in hedges. [Low L. _berberis_; the Ar. _barbaris_ is
borrowed.]

BARBETTE, bar-b[.e]t', _n._ an earthen terrace inside the parapet of a
rampart, serving as a platform for heavy guns: in ironclad ships, a heavily
armoured redoubt amidships. [Fr.]

BARBICAN, bär'bi-kan, _n._ a projecting watch-tower over the gate of a
castle or fortified town, esp. the outwork intended to defend the
drawbridge. [O. Fr. _barbacane_, also in Sp., Port., and It. forms; perh.
of Ar. or Pers. origin. Col. Yule suggests _b[=a]bkh[=a]nah_, gate-house,
name in the East for a towered gateway.]

BARBULE, bärb'[=u]l, _n._ (_bot._) a small barb or beard: a pointed
barb-like process fringing the barbs of a feather. [See BARBEL.]

BARCAROLLE, bär'ka-r[=o]l, _n._ a boat-song of the Venetian gondoliers: a
musical composition of a similar character. [It. _barcaruolo_, a boatman,
from _barca_, a bark, a barge, a boat.]

BARD, bärd, _n._ a poet and singer among the ancient Celts: a poet--dims.
BARD'LING, BARD'LET, poetaster.--_n._ BARD'-CRAFT (_Browning_).--_adj._
BARD'IC. [Gael. and Ir. _bàrd_.]

BARDED, bärd'ed, _adj._ caparisoned, as horses.--_n._ BARD (_obs._), the
protective covering of a war-horse or a man-at-arms. [Fr. _barde_--Sp.
_albarda_, pack-saddle, perh. from Ar. _al-barda`ah_; _al_, the, and
_barda`ah_, mule's pack-saddle.]

BARE, b[=a]r, _adj._ uncovered: naked: open to view: poor, scanty:
unadorned: (_Shak._) unarmed: mere or by itself: (_Shak._) paltry,
desolate: empty: (_Spens._) rude.--_v.t._ to strip or uncover.--_adj._
BARE'BACKED, with bare back: unsaddled.--_n._ BARE'BONE (_Shak._), a very
lean person.--_adj._ BARE'FACED, with the face uncovered: (_Shak._) avowed:
impudent.--_adv._ BARE'FACEDLY.--_n._ BARE'FACEDNESS.--_adjs._ BARE'FOOT,
-ED, having the feet bare, often of some monastic orders; BARE'-GNAWN
(_Shak._), gnawed bare; BARE'HEADED, having the head bare; BAR'ISH
(_Carlyle_), somewhat bare; BARE'LEGGED, having the legs bare.--_adv._
BARE'LY.--_ns._ BARE'NESS; BARE'SARK, a fierce Norse fighter, a
berserker.--_adv._ in a shirt only. [A.S. _bær_; Ger. _baar_, _bar_; Ice.
_berr_.]

BARE, b[=a]r, old _pa.t._ of BEAR.

BARAGE, ba-r[=a]zh', _n._ a light, silky dress-stuff, named from _Barèges_
in the Pyrenees.

BARGAIN, bär'gin, _n._ a contract or agreement: a favourable transaction:
an advantageous purchase: (_Shak._) chaffering.--_v.i._ to make a contract
or agreement: to chaffer: to count on, take into consideration (with
_for_): to lose by bad bargaining (with _away_).--_n._ BAR'GAINER.--BARGAIN
AND SALE, in law, a mode of conveyance whereby property may be assigned or
transferred for valuable consideration.--INTO THE BARGAIN, over and above;
TO MAKE THE BEST OF A BAD BARGAIN, to make the best of difficult
circumstances; TO SELL ANY ONE A BARGAIN (_Shak._), to befool him; TO
STRIKE A BARGAIN, to come to terms about a purchase. [O. Fr.
_bargaigner_--Low L. _barcaniare_; acc. to Diez from _barca_, a boat.]

BARGE, bärj, _n._ flat-bottomed freight boat, with or without sails, used
on rivers and canals: the second boat of a man-of-war: a large pleasure or
state boat.--_ns._ BAR'GEE, a bargeman; BARGE'MAN, The manager of a barge;
BARGE'-MAS'TER, the proprietor of a barge. [O. Fr. _barge_--Low L. _barga_.
Prob. a doublet of BARK, a barge.]

[Illustration]

BARGE-BOARD, barj'-b[=o]rd, _n._ a board extending along the edge of the
gable of a house to cover the rafters and keep out the rain. [The _barge_
here may be conn. with Low L. _bargus_, a gallows.]

BARGHEST, bär'gest, _n._ a dog-like goblin portending death. [Perh. conn.
with Ger. _berg-geist_, mountain-ghost.]

BARIC. See BARIUM.

BARILLA, bar-il'a, _n._ an impure carbonate of soda obtained by burning
several marine plants (that grow chiefly on the east coast of Spain), used
in the manufacture of soap, glass, &c. [Sp. _barrilla_.]

BARITONE, bar'i-t[=o]n. Same as BARYTONE.

BARIUM, b[=a]'ri-um, _n._ the metal present in heavy spar (sulphate of
baryta) and baryta, formerly thought to be white, but now known to possess
a yellow colour.--_adj._ BAR'IC. [From BARYTA; cf. _soda_, _sodium_.]

BARK, bärk, _n._ the abrupt cry uttered by a dog, wolf, &c.--_v.i._ to yelp
like a dog: to clamour.--_v.t._ (_Spens._) to utter with a bark.--_n._
BARK'ER, a shop-tout: (_slang_) a pistol, cannon.--HIS BARK IS WORSE THAN
HIS BITE, his angry expressions are worse than his actual deeds. [A.S.
_beorcan_, prob. a variety of _brecan_, to crack, snap. See BREAK.]

BARK, BARQUE, bärk, _n._ a barge: a ship of small size, square-sterned,
without head-rails: technically, a three-masted vessel whose mizzen-mast is
_fore-and-aft_ rigged instead of being square-rigged, like the fore and
main masts--barks of over 3000 tons are now frequently built.--_ns._
BAR'KANTINE, BAR'QUENTINE, a three-masted vessel, with the fore-mast
square-rigged, and the main-mast and mizzen-mast fore-and-aft rigged. [Fr.
_barque_--Low L. _barca_; perh. from Gr. _baris_, a Nile-boat.]

BARK, bärk, _n._ the rind or covering of the trunk and branches of a tree:
that used in tanning or dyeing, or the residue thereof, laid upon a street
to deaden the sound, &c.: the envelopment or outer covering of
anything.--_v.t._ to strip or peel the bark from: to rub off
(_skin_).--_n._ BARK'-BED, a hotbed made of spent bark.--_v.t._ BARK'EN, to
dry up into a barky substance.--_v.i._ to become like bark.--_adjs._
BARK'LESS; BARK'Y.--CINCHONA, JESUITS', PERUVIAN BARK, the bark of the
cinchona, from which quinine is made. [Scand. _börkr_; Dan. _bark_.]

BARKER'S MILL, bärk'[.e]rz mil, a water-wheel invented in the 18th century
by Dr _Barker_.

BARLEY, bär'li, _n._ a hardy grain used for food, but chiefly for making
malt liquors and spirits.--_ns._ BAR'LEY-BREE, -BROTH, strong ale;
BAR'LEY-CORN, personified as _John Barleycorn_, the grain from which malt
is made: a single grain of barley: a measure of length = 1/3 of an inch;
BAR'LEY-SU'GAR, a mixture of sugar with a decoction of pearl-barley, boiled
till it is candied; BAR'LEY-WAT'ER, a decoction of pearl-barley;
PEARL'-BAR'LEY, the grain stripped of husk and pellicle, and completely
rounded by grinding; POT'-BAR'LEY, the grain deprived by milling of its
outer husk, used in making broth, &c. [A.S. _bærlíc_, _bere_, and suffix
_-líc_.]

BARLEY, bär'li, _interj._ (_Scot._) a term used in games in demand of a
truce, parley (of which it is most prob. a corruption).

BARLEY-BRAKE, bär'li-br[=a]k, _n._ an old country game, originally played
by three couples, of which one, left in a middle den called 'hell,' had to
catch the others, who could break or separate when about to be overtaken.
[Perh. from the grain, _barley_, because often played in a barley-field; or
perh. from the word preceding.]

BARM, bärm, _n._ froth of beer or other fermenting liquor, used as leaven:
yeast.--_adjs._ BARM'Y; BARM'Y-BRAINED, flighty. [A.S. _beorma_; cog. with
Dan. _bärme_, Ger. _bärme_.]

BARMBRACK, bärm'brak, _n._ a currant-bun. [Ir. _bairigen breac_, speckled
cake.]

BARM-CLOTH, bärm'-kloth, _n._ (_Morris_) an apron. [A.S. _barm_, bosom,
_-beran_, to bear, and CLOTH.]

BARMECIDE, bär'me-s[=i]d, _n._ one who offers an imaginary or pretended
banquet or other benefit.--_adjs._ BAR'MECIDE, BARMEC[=I]'DAL. [From a
story in the _Arabian Nights_, in which a beggar is entertained to an
imaginary feast by one of the _Barmecides_, a Persian family who attained
to great influence at the court of the Abbasside caliphs.]

BARMKIN, bärm'kin, _n._ the rampart of a castle.

BARN, bärn, _n._ a building in which grain, hay, &c. are stored.--_v.t._ to
store in a barn.--_ns._ and _adjs._ BARN'-DOOR, BARN'-YARD, as in barn-yard
fowl.--_n._ BARN'-OWL, the commonest of British owls.--BARN-DOOR, in
cricket, used of a player who blocks every ball: humorously, any large
target. [A.S. _bere-ern_, contracted _bern_, from _bere_, barley, _ern_, a
house.]

BARNABY, bärn'a-bi, _n._ form of _Barnabas_, the apostle.--_n._ BAR'NABITE,
a member of the congregation of regular canons of St Paul, founded at Milan
in 1530, so called from their preaching in the church of St Barnabas
there.--BARNABY-DAY, BARNABY BRIGHT, or LONG BARNABY, St Barnabas' Day,
11th June, in Old Style reckoned the longest day.

BARNACLE, bär'na-kl, _n._ a shellfish which adheres to rocks and the
bottoms of ships: a companion who sticks closely.--_n._ BAR'NACLE-GOOSE, a
species of wild goose belonging to the Northern seas, so called from a
notion that they were produced from the barnacles mentioned. [O. Fr.
_bernaque_--Low L. _bernaca_; by some referred to a supposed form
_pernacula_, dim. of _perna_, a kind of shellfish; by others to a Celtic
origin.]

BARNACLE, bär'na-kl, _n._ an instrument consisting of two branches joined
by a hinge, placed on the nose of horses to keep them quiet: (_pl._) a
colloquial term for 'spectacles.'--_adj._ BAR'NACLED. [O. Fr. _bernac_, of
which _bernacle_ seems to be a dim. form. The sense of 'spectacles' has
been traced to O. Fr. _bericle_, eye-glass--_berillus_, beryl; but this is
improbable.]

BARNEY, bär'ni, _n._ (_slang_) humbug: a prize-fight.

BARNUMISE, bär'num-[=i]z, _v.t._ to advertise and display on a great
scale.--_n._ BAR'NUMISM. [From _Barnum_, a great showman (1810-91).]

BAROGRAPH, bar'o-graf, _n._ a barometer which records automatically
variations of atmospheric pressure. [Gr. _baros_, weight, _graphein_, to
write.]

BAROMETER, bar-om'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument by which the weight or
pressure of the atmosphere is measured, and changes of weather, or heights
above sea-level, indicated.--_adj._ BAROMET'RIC.--_adv._
BAROMET'RICALLY.--_n._ BAROM'ETRY. [Gr. _baros_, weight, _metron_,
measure.]

BAROMETZ, bar'o-metz, _n._ the hairy prostrate stem of a fern found near
the Caspian Sea, at one time supposed to be at once plant and animal, to
grow on a stalk, and to eat grass like a lamb, &c.; hence also called, as
by Mandeville, the _Scythian Lamb_. [Erroneous form of Russ. _baranetz_,
dim. of _baran_, ram.]

[Illustration]

BARON, bar'on, _n._ a title of rank, the lowest in the House of Peers:
formerly a title of the judges of the Court of Exchequer: in feudal times
the tenants-in-chief of the Crown, later the peers or great lords of the
realm generally: till 1832, the name for the parliamentary representatives
of the Cinque Ports: in Germany, the signification, instead of becoming
restricted as in England, has become extended--the greater or dynasty
barons having all been elevated to higher titles, a large number being
designated barons in virtue of a diploma from some reigning prince, the
title being used also by all his descendants.--_ns._ BAR'ONAGE, the whole
body of barons; BAR'ON-BAIL'IE, a magistrate appointed by the lord-superior
in a burgh of barony; BAR'ONESS, a baron's wife, or a lady holding a
baronial title in her own right.--_adj._ BAR[=O]N'IAL, pertaining to a
baron or barony.--_n._ BAR'ONY, the territory of a baron: in Ireland, a
division of a county: in Scotland, a large freehold estate, or manor, even
though not carrying with it a baron's title and rank: the rank of
baron.--BARON OF BEEF, a joint consisting of two sirloins left uncut at the
backbone. [O. Fr. _barun_, _-on_--Low L. _baro_, _-onem_; in the Romance
tongues the word meant a man as opposed to a woman, a strong man, a
warrior; traced by some to Celt. _bar_, a hero; by others to Old High Ger.
_bero_, bearer, carrier.]

BARONET, bar'on-et, _n._ the lowest hereditary title in the United Kingdom
(of England--now of Great Britain--since 1611; of Scotland--or of Nova
Scotia--since 1625; of Ireland, since 1619).--_ns._ BAR'ONETAGE, the whole
body of baronets: a list of such; BAR'ONETCY.--_adj._ BARONET'ICAL. [Dim.
of BARON.]

BAROQUE, bar-[=o]k', _adj._ originally a jeweller's term, but applied in
art generally to extravagant ornamental designs: whimsical, odd. [Fr.
_baroque_; perh. from L. _verruca_, wart, but referred by some to Ar.
_bur[=a]q_, hard earth mixed with stones.]

BAROSCOPE, bar'[=o]-sk[=o]p, _n._ an instrument for indicating changes in
the density of the air. [Gr. _baros_, weight, _skopein_, to see.]

BAROUCHE, ba-r[=oo]sh', _n._ a double-seated four-wheeled carriage with a
falling top. [It. _baroccio_--L. _birotus_, two-wheeled, from _bis_, twice,
_rota_, a wheel.]

BARQUE. Same as BARK (2).

BARQUENTINE, bär'ken-t[=e]n, _n._ same as BARKANTINE (q.v. under BARK, a
ship). [Formed from BARQUE, like BRIGANTINE from BRIG.]

BARRACAN, bar'a-kan, _n._ a thick, strong stuff resembling camlet. [Fr.;
It.--Ar. _barrak[=a]n_, a dark dress, Pers. _barak_, a stuff made of
camel's hair.]

BARRACE, bar'as, _n._ (_obs._) the lists in a tournament. [O. Fr.
_barras_--_barre_, bar.]

BARRACK, bar'ak, _n._ a building for soldiers, esp. in garrison (generally
in _pl._). [Fr. _baraque_ (It. _baracca_, Sp. _barraca_, a tent); acc. to
Diez from _barra_, bar.]

BARRACOON, bar'a-k[=oo]n, _n._ a depôt for slaves. [Sp.--_barraca_.]

BARRACOOTA, -CUDA, bar'a-k[=oo]'ta, -k[=oo]'da, _n._ a voracious West
Indian fish.--Also BARRACOU'TA, an Australian food-fish. [Sp.]

BARRAGE, bär'[=a]j, _n._ the forming of an artificial bar in order to
deepen a river. [Fr. _barrage_--_barre_, bar.]

BARRATOR, bar-[=a]t'or, _n._ one who vexatiously stirs up lawsuits,
quarrels, &c.--_adj._ BAR'RATROUS.--_adv._ BAR'RATROUSLY.--_n._ BAR'RATRY,
fraudulent practices on the part of the master or mariners of a ship to the
prejudice of the owners: vexatious litigation, or the stirring up of suits
and quarrels among subjects, forbidden under penalties to lawyers: traffic
in offices of church or state. [O. Fr. _barateor_--_barat_, deceit; traced
by some to Gr. _prattein_, by others to a Celt. or a Scand. origin.]

BARREL, bar'el, _n._ a cylindrical wooden vessel made of curved staves
bound with hoops: the quantity which such a vessel contains (36 imperial
gallons of ale and beer): a certain weight or quantity of other goods
usually sold in casks called barrels: anything long and hollow, as the
barrel of a gun, or cylindrical and barrel-shaped.--_v.t._ to put in a
barrel.--_n._ BAR'REL-BULK, a measurement of five cubic feet.--_p.adj._
BAR'RELLED, having a barrel or barrels: placed in a barrel.--_ns._
BAR'REL-OR'GAN, an organ in which the music is produced by a barrel or
cylinder set with pins, the revolution of which opens the key-valves and
produces the music; BARREL-VAULT, a vault with a simple semi-cylindrical
roof.--_adj._ BAR'REL-VAULT'ED. [Fr. _baril_ (Sp. _barril_, It.
_barile_)--Low L. _barile_, _barillus_, possibly from _barra_, bar.]

BARREN, bar'en, _adj._ incapable of bearing offspring: unfruitful: dull,
stupid: unprofitable (with _of_).--_adj._ BAR'REN-BEAT'EN.--_adv._
BAR'RENLY.--_n._ BAR'RENNESS.--_adjs._ BAR'REN-SPIR'ITED; BAR'REN-WIT'TED.
[O. Fr. _barain_, _brahain_, _brehaing_, perh. from _bar_, man, as if
'male-like, not producing offspring.']

BARRET, bar'et, _n._ a flat cap, esp. the BIRETTA (q.v.). [Fr. _barrette_,
Sp. _birreta_. See BIRETTA.]

BARRICADE, bar'ik-[=a]d, _n._ a temporary fortification raised to hinder
the advance of an enemy, as in the street fights of Parisian
insurrections.--_v.t._ to obstruct: to fortify.--Earlier form
BARRIC[=A]'DO. [Fr.; _barrique_, a cask, the first street barricades having
consisted of casks filled with stones, &c. See BAR.]

BARRICO, bar-[=e]'ko, _n._ a small cask. [Sp.]

BARRIER, bar'i-[.e]r, _n._ a defence against attack: a limit or boundary: a
fence, railing, gate where customs are collected: the lists in a
tournament: any obstacle that keeps apart: (_pl._) a martial exercise in
15th and 16th centuries.--_v.t._ to shut by means of a barrier.--_n._
BAR'RIER-REEF, a coral-reef surrounding an island or fringing a coast with
a navigable channel inside.--BARRIER ACT, an act passed by the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland in 1697 as a security against
innovations, decreeing that changes in the law of the Church, even when
approved by the Assembly, shall not become law till approved also by a
majority of presbyteries. [O. Fr. _barrière_--Low L. _barraria_--_barra_,
bar.]

BARRISTER, bar'is-t[.e]r, _n._ one who is qualified to plead at the bar in
an English or Irish law-court.--_adj._ BARRIST[=E]R'IAL.--_n._
BAR'RISTERSHIP.--REVISING BARRISTER, a barrister appointed annually by the
English judges to revise the lists and settle who are the persons entitled
to vote for members of parliament. [From _barra_, bar, the suffix being
undetermined.]

BARROW, bar'r[=o], _n._ a small hand or one-wheel carriage used to bear or
convey a load.--_n._ BAR'ROW-TRAM, the shaft of a barrow. [M. E. _barewe_,
from an assumed A.S. form _bearwe_--_beran_, to bear.]

BARROW, bar'r[=o], _n._ originally a mountain, hillock: a mound raised over
graves in former times. [A.S. _beorg_; cog. with Ger. _berg_.]

BARROW, bar'r[=o], _n._ a long sleeveless flannel garment for infants.
[A.S. _beorgan_, to protect.]

BAR-SINISTER. Variant of BATON-SINISTER (q.v. under BATON).

BARTER, bär't[.e]r, _v.t._ to give one thing in exchange for another (with
_for_, _away_).--_v.i._ to traffic by exchanging.--_n._ traffic by exchange
of commodities.--_n._ BAR'TERER, one who barters. [Prob. from O. Fr.
_barat_.]

BARTHOLOMEW-TIDE, bar-thol'o-m[=u]-t[=i]d, _n._ the day of the festival of
St Bartholomew, 24th August: the name was also applied to things sold at
the fair.--Often spelt BAR'TLEMY.--BLACK BARTHOLOMEW, 24th August 1662, the
day on which the Act of Uniformity came into force within the Church of
England.

[Illustration]

BARTISAN, bär'ti-zan, _n._ a small overhanging turret projecting from an
angle on the top of a tower. [Apparently an adaptation by Scott of Scot.
_bertisene_, traceable to O. Fr. _bretesche_, a parapet of wood.]

BARTON, bar'ton, _n._ a farm-yard. [A.S. _bere-tún_, yard, _bere_, barley,
and _tún_, enclosure.]

BARYCENTRIC, bar-i-sen'trik, _adj._ pertaining to the centre of gravity.
[Gr. _barys_, heavy, _kentron_, centre.]

BARYTA, ba-r[=i]'ta, BARYTES, ba-r[=i]'t[=e]z, _n._ the earth present in
the minerals _witherite_ and _heavy spar_.--_adj._ BARYT'IC, of or
containing baryta. [From Gr. _barys_, heavy.]

BARYTONE, bar'i-t[=o]n, _n._ a deep-toned male voice between bass and
tenor: a singer with such a voice: in Greek, applied to words not having an
acute accent on the last syllable. [Through Fr. from Gr. _barys_, heavy,
deep, and _tonos_, a tone.]

BASALT, bas-awlt', _n._ a hard, dark-coloured rock of igneous
origin.--_adj._ BASALT'IC. [L. _basaltes_, an African word.]

BASANITE, bas'an-[=i]t, _n._ a kind of quartz serviceable for testing the
purity of the precious metals by the marks made. [Gr. _basanos_,
touchstone.]

BASBLEU. Same as BLUE-STOCKING (q.v. under BLUE).

BASCINET. Same as BASINET.

BASCULE, bas'k[=u]l, _n._ an apparatus of the lever kind, in which one end
is raised while the other is depressed. [Fr. _bas_, down, and _cul_, the
posteriors.]

BASE, b[=a]s, _n._ that on which a thing rests: foot: bottom: foundation:
support: the chief ingredient, as in dyeing and chemistry: the
starting-point, in a race: the fixed goal across which the ball is struck
in hockey, the fixed stations at base-ball: the point from which the
operations of a campaign are conducted: a measured line serving as a basis
for trigonometrical calculations: the surface on which a plane or solid
figure stands: (_chem._) a term applied to a compound body, generally
consisting of a metal united with oxygen; (_archit._) the foot or lower
member of a pillar, on which the shaft rests: (_her._) the lower portion of
the shield--any figure placed on it is said to be 'in base:' a small
portion of the base of a shield parted off by a horizontal line is
sometimes called a base.--_v.t._ to found or place on a base:--_pr.p._
b[=a]s'ing; _pa.p._ based (b[=a]st).--_adjs._ BAS'AL, BAS'ILAR, pertaining
to or situated at the base, esp. of the skull; BASE'LESS, without a base or
foundation.--_ns._ BASE'LESSNESS; BASE'MENT, the base or lowest story of a
building.--_adj._ BAS'EN-WIDE (_Spens._), widely extended.--_n._
BASE'-PLATE, the foundation plate of a piece of heavy machinery.--_n.pl._
BAS'ES, a kind of embroidered mantle which hung down from the middle to
about the knees or lower, worn by knights on horseback: (_Spens._) armour
for the legs.--_ns._ BASE'-STRING, the string of a musical instrument that
gives the lowest note; BASE'-V[=I]OL (same as BASS-VIOL).--_adj._ BAS'IC
(_chem._), belonging to or of the nature of a base.--_v.t._ BAS'IFY
(_chem._), to convert into a salifiable base:--_pr.p._ b[=a]s'ifying;
_pa.p._ b[=a]s'if[=i]ed. [Fr.--L.--Gr. _basis_--_ba-_, in _bainein_, to
go.]

BASE, b[=a]s, _adj._ low in place, value, estimation, or principle: mean:
vile: worthless: debased: counterfeit: (_law_) servile, as opposed to
_free_: humble: (_B._ and _Shak._) lowly.--_adj._ BASE'-BORN,
illegitimate.--_adv._ BASE'LY.--_adj._ BASE'-MIND'ED, of a low mind or
spirit: mean.--_n._ BASE'NESS.--_adj._ BASE'-SPIR'ITED, mean-spirited. [Fr.
_bas_--Low L. _bassus_, thick, fat, a vulgar Roman word, found also in name
_Bassus_.]

BASE, b[=a]s, _v.t._ a form of ABASE.

BASE, b[=a]s, _n._ an old game played by two sides occupying contiguous
spaces, called _bases_ or _homes_, off which any player is liable to be
touched with the hand or struck by a ball by the enemy, and so attached to
their sides. Forms of this game are known as _Prisoner's Base_ or _Bars_,
and _Rounders_, and the national American game of _Base-ball_ is a
development from it.

BASE-BALL, b[=a]s'-bawl, _n._ a game played with a bat and a ball, and run
round bases, marking the circuit to be taken by each player of the inside
after striking the ball. There are nine players on each side; the pitcher,
of the one side, throws the ball; one of the other side tries to hit it as
it passes him; and the runs to the bases are regulated according as the
ball falls inside or outside certain lines, &c. A development from
rounders, base-ball has been the American national game since 1865.
[Coupled with cricket in Jane Austen's _Northanger Abbey_ (written 1798).]

BASECOURT, b[=a]s'k[=o]rt, _n._ the outer court of a mansion, which
contained the stable-yard and servants' accommodation, as distinguished
from the principal quadrangle: an inferior court of justice. [Fr.
_basse-court_.]

BASENET. Same as BASINET.

BASH, bash, _v.t._ to beat or smash in.--_n._ BASH. [Prob. Scand.]

BASHAW, ba-shaw', _n._ a pasha: a haughty man--now usually written PASHA or
PACHA (q.v.).--_ns._ BASHAW'ISM, BASHAW'SHIP. [Turk.]

BASHFUL, bash'f[=oo]l, _adj._ easily confused: modest: shy: wanting
confidence.--_v.i._ BASH (_Spens._), to be abashed.--_adv._
BASH'FULLY.--_n._ BASH'FULNESS.--_adj._ BASH'LESS, unashamed. [See ABASH.]

BASHI-BAZOUK, bash'i-ba-z[=oo]k', _n._ a Turkish irregular trooper. They
are mostly Asiatics, and are brutal plundering ruffians, capable, as in
1876 in Bulgaria, of the most devilish atrocities. [Turk. _bashi-bozuq_.]

BASHLYK, bash'lik, _n._ a kind of hood with long ends worn in Russia.
[Russ. _bashluik[)u]_, a Caucasian hood.]

BASIL, baz'il, _n._ a mainly tropical or subtropical genus of Labiatæ,
characterised by a pleasant aromatic smell and taste, and reckoned amongst
_sweet herbs_.--SWEET BASIL is an Indian annual long cultivated in Europe
for seasoning purposes. [O. Fr. _basile_--L. _basilisca_--Gr. _basilikon_,
royal.]

BASIL, baz'il, _n._ a sheepskin roughly tanned and undressed.

BASIL. See BEZEL.

BASILICA, baz-il'ik-a, _n._ among the Romans, a large oblong hall, with
double colonnades and a semicircular apse at the end, used for judicial and
commercial purposes--many of them were afterwards converted into Christian
churches: a magnificent church built after the plan of the ancient
basilica.--_adj._ BASIL'ICAN. [L. _basilica_, Gr. _basilik[=e]_ (_oikia_, a
house), belonging to a king, from _basileus_, a king.]

BASILICON, baz-il'ik-on, _n._ a name given to various kinds of ointment as
possessing sovereign virtues. [Gr. _basilikon_, royal.]

BASILISK, baz'il-isk, _n._ a fabulous creature, about a foot long, with a
black-and-yellow skin and fiery red eyes, so named, according to Pliny,
from the crest on the head like a crown--variously regarded as a kind of
dragon or cockatrice: in modern zoology, a harmless crested lizard of
tropical South America: an ancient brass cannon throwing a shot of about
200 lb. weight. [Gr. _basiliskos_, dim. of _basileus_, a king.]

BASIN, b[=a]s'n, _n._ a wide open vessel or dish: any hollow place
containing water, as a dock: the area drained by a river and its
tributaries. [O. Fr. _bacin_--Low L. _bachinus_, perh. from the Celtic.]

[Illustration]

BASINET, bas'i-net, _n._ a light globular headpiece worn alone with a
visor, or with the great helm resting on the shoulders, worn over it.--Also
BAS'NET.

BASIS, b[=a]s'is, _n._ the foundation, or that on which a thing rests: the
pedestal of a column: the groundwork or first principle:--_pl._ BAS'ES.
[See BASE (1).]

BASK, bask, _v.i._ to lie in the warmth or sunshine. [Scand. _badask_, to
bathe.]

BASKET, bas'ket, _n._ a vessel made of plaited twigs, rushes, or other
flexible materials.--_ns._ BAS'KETFUL, as much as fills a basket;
BAS'KET-HILT, the hilt of a sword with a covering wrought like basket-work
to defend the hand from injury; BAS'KET-MAK'ER; BAS'KET-WORK, any structure
of interlaced twigs or the like. [Prob. the L. _bascauda_; the W. _basged_
is apparently borrowed from the English.]

BASQUE, bask, _adj._ relating to the _Basques_, or their wonderful
language, with its extreme variability of dialects--the only example of a
consistently incorporating language.--_n._ a native of the Basque
provinces: the distinctive language of the Basques: a kind of short-skirted
jacket worn by women, a continuation of the bodice a little below the
waist.--_adj._ BASQUED (baskt), furnished with a basque.--_n._ BASQ'UINE,
an outer petticoat worn by Basque and Spanish women. [Fr. _Basque_--Low L.
_Vasco_, an inhabitant of _Vasconia_, whence _Gascony_. The Basques
themselves call their tongue _Eskuara_, _Euscara_, whence the Fr.
_Euscarien_.]

BAS-RELIEF, bä-re-l[=e]f', BASS-RELIEF, bas're-l[=e]f', _n._ (_sculp._)
figures which do not stand far out from the ground on which they are
formed--also used in the Italian form BASS'O-RILIE'VO. [See BASE, low, and
RELIEF.]

BASS, b[=a]s, _n._ the low or grave part in music.--_adj._ low, deep,
grave.--_v.t._ to sound in a deep tone.--_ns._ BASS'-HORN, a musical
wind-instrument, a modification of the bassoon, much lower and deeper in
its tones; THOR'OUGH-BASS, the theory of harmony. [See BASE, low.]

BASS. Same as BAST.

BASS, BASSE, bas, _n._ a marine fish allied to the perch. [A.S. _bærs_; cf.
Ger. _bars_, the perch.]

BASSA, bas'sa, _n._ Same as BASHAW.

BASSET, bas'et, _n._ a short-legged dog used in unearthing foxes and
badgers: an old Venetian game at cards, resembling faro, widely popular in
the 18th century: (_geol._) the outcrop or emergence of mineral strata at
the surface.--_v.i._ to incline upward so as to appear at the surface, to
crop up.--_n._ BAS'SET-HORN (It. _corno di bassetto_), the richest and
softest of all wind-instruments, similar to a clarionet in tone and
fingering, but with a twice-bent wooden tube, having a compass of two and a
half octaves. [Fr. _bas_, low.]

BASSINET, BASSINETTE, bas'si-net, _n._ a kind of basket with a hood in
which an infant is placed as in a cradle: a similarly shaped perambulator.
[Fr. dim. of _basin_, a basin.]

BASSO, bas'so, _n._ the same as BASS (1): also a bass singer.

BASSOON, bas-[=oo]n', _n._ (It. _fagotto_) a musical wind-instrument
filling an important place in the modern orchestra, of the reed species,
made of maple-wood or plane-tree, its compass from B flat below the bass
stave to C in the treble.--The DOUBLE BASSOON (It. _contrafagotto_) sounds
an octave lower.--_n._ BASSOON'IST. [It. _bassone_, augmentative of
_basso_, low, from root of BASE.]

BASS-VIOL, b[=a]s'-v[=i]'ol, _n._ a musical instrument with four strings,
used for playing the bass in concerted music; the violoncello. [See BASS,
low, and VIOL.]

BAST, bast, _n._ the inner bark of the lime-tree: matting made of it. [A.S.
_bæst_; Dut., Dan., Ger. _bast_.]

BASTARD, bas'tard, _n._ a child born of parents not married.--_adj._ born
out of wedlock: not genuine: resembling, but not identical with, the
species bearing the name: of abnormal shape or size: false.--_n._
BAS'TARD-BAR, a popular but inaccurate name for the baton-sinister in
heraldry.--_v.t._ BAS'TARDISE, to prove to be a bastard.--_adv._ BAS'TARDLY
(_obs._).--_ns._ BAS'TARD-WING, three, four, or five feathers springing
from the side of the wing of a bird near the point, attached to a bony
process which is the homologue of the thumb in some mammalia; BAS'TARDY,
BAS'TARDISM, the state of being a bastard.--BASTARD TITLE, an abbreviated
title of a book on an otherwise blank page preceding the full title-page;
BASTARD TYPES, types cast with an extra deep bevel to obviate the use of
leads, as Longprimer face on Pica body. [Fr. _bâtard_; O. Fr. _fils de
bast_, son of the pack-saddle, _bast_ (_bât_) being a coarse saddle for
beasts of burden.]

BASTE, b[=a]st, _v.t._ to beat with a stick. [Prob. conn. with Ice.
_beysta_, Dan. _böste_, to beat.]

BASTE, b[=a]st, _v.t._ to drop fat or butter over meat while roasting to
keep it from burning and to improve the flavour. [Ety. unknown.]

BASTE, b[=a]st, _v.t._ to sew slightly or with long stitches. [O. Fr.
_bastír_, from Old High Ger. _bestan_, to sew.]

BASTILLE, bast-[=e]l', _n._ an old fortress in Paris long used as a stale
prison, and demolished by a revolutionary mob in July 1789: any prison
regarded as a symbol of tyranny. [Fr.--O. Fr. _bastir_ (Fr. _bâtir_), to
build.]

BASTINADO, bast-in-[=a]d'o, _v.t._ to beat with a baton or stick, esp. on
the soles of the feet (a form of punishment in the East):--_pr.p._
bastin[=a]d'ing or bastin[=a]d'oing; _pa.p._ bastin[=a]d'ed or
bastin[=a]d'oed.--_ns._ BASTINADE', BASTIN[=A]D'O. [Sp. _bastonada_, Fr.
_bastonnade_--_baston_, _bâton_. See BATON.]

BASTION, bast'yun, _n._ a kind of tower at the angles of a
fortification.--_adj._ BAST'IONED. [Fr.--O. Fr. _bastir_, to build.]

BAT, bat, _n._ a heavy stick: a flat club for striking the ball in cricket,
a club for base-balls, a batsman: the clown's sword in a pantomime: a piece
of brick: (_slang_) rate of speed, style.--_v.i._ to use the bat in
cricket:--_pr.p._ bat'ting; _pa.p._ bat'ted.--_ns._ BAT'TER, BATS'MAN, one
who wields the bat at cricket, &c.; BAT'TING, the management of a bat in
playing games: cotton fibre prepared in sheets. [Perh. from A.S. _bat_ (a
doubtful form), prob. Celt. _bat_, staff.]

BAT, bat, _n._ an animal with a body like a mouse, but which flies on wings
attached mainly to its fore-feet, but extending along its sides to the
hind-feet. [M. E. _bakke_, apparently from Scand.; cf. Dan. _aftenbakke_,
evening-bat.]

BATABLE, b[=a]t'a-bl, _adj._ debatable, disputable. [A contr. of
DEBATABLE.]

BATATA, ba-tä'ta, _n._ a plant with tuberous roots, the sweet potato. [Sp.
_batata_, potato.]

BATAVIAN, ba-t[=a]'vi-an, _adj._ pertaining to the ancient _Batavi_ in the
Low Countries, or to the modern Dutch, their descendants.

BATCH, bach, _n._ the quantity of bread baked or of anything made or got
ready at one time: a set. [From BAKE.]

BATE. Same as ABATE.

BATE, b[=a]t, _n._ (_Spens._) strife, contention.--_adj._ BATE'-BREED'ING
(_Shak._). [Abbrev. of DEBATE.]

BATE, b[=a]t, _n._ diminution (_dial._, esp. in combination).

BATE, b[=a]t, _v.i._ (_Shak._) to beat the wings impatiently: (_obs._) to
be impatient. [O. E. _batre_--Low L. _bat[)e]re_.]

BATEAU, bä-to', _n._ a light river-boat, esp. those used on Canadian
rivers. [Fr.--O. Fr. _batel_, boat.]

BATELESS, b[=a]t'les, _adj._ (_Shak._) that cannot be bated or blunted.

BATFOWLING, bat'fowl-ing, _n._ the catching birds at night when at roost.
[BAT, club, and FOWL.]

BATH, bäth, _n._ water for plunging the body into: a bathing: a house for
bathing: a place for undergoing medical treatment by means of bathing:
(_phot._) a solution in which plates are plunged:--_pl._ BATHS
(bä_th_z).--_ns._ BATH'-BRICK, a preparation of siliceous silt,
manufactured at Bridgwater in the form of bricks, and used in cleaning
knives; BATH'CHAIR, a large wheeled chair for invalids; BATH'HOUSE;
BATH'MAN; BATH'ROOM; BATH'-STONE, a building stone quarried at Bath;
BATH'WOMAN; BLOOD'-BATH, a massacre.--BATH GUIDE, a poem of the 18th
century, often taken as a type of 'Society' verse.--ORDER OF THE BATH, an
English order of knighthood, so named from the bath before installation
(including three classes--military and civil knights grand-cross, G.C.B.;
knights commanders, K.C.B.; and companions, C.B.). [A.S. _bæth_, cog. with
Ger. _bad_.]

BATH, bäth, _n._ the largest Jewish liquid measure, containing about six
gallons. [Heb.]

BATHE, b[=a]_th_, _v.t._ to wash as in a bath: to wash or moisten with any
liquid: to moisten, suffuse, encompass.--_v.i._ to take a bath.--_n._ the
act of taking a bath.--_ns._ BATH'ING-BOX, a box for bathers to undress and
dress in; BATH'ING-MACHINE', a small carriage in which a bather may be
carried out into water conveniently deep for bathing. [A.S. _bathian_; Old
High Ger. _badôn_, _bathôn_ (Ger. _baden_).]

BATHOMETER, bath-om'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for ascertaining depth.
[Gr. _bathos_, depth, _metron_, measure.]

BATHORSE, baw'hors, _n._ a packhorse carrying the baggage of an officer.
[Fr. _bât_, a pack-saddle.]

BATHOS, b[=a]'thos, _n._ a ludicrous descent from the elevated to the mean
in writing or speech.--_adj._ BATHET'IC, irregularly formed on the analogy
of _pathos_, _pathetic_. [Gr. _bathos_, depth, from _bathys_, deep.]

BATHYBIUS, bath-ib'i-us, _n._ name given to a supposed low form of life at
the bottom of some parts of the deep sea. [Formed from Gr. _bathys_, deep,
and _bios_, life.]

BATHYMETRY, bath-im'et-ri, _n._ the science of measuring the depth of seas
and lakes. [Gr. _bathys_, deep, _metria_, measurement.]

BATING, b[=a]t'ing, _prep._ abating, excepting.

BATISTE, ba-t[=e]st', _n._ usual French name for cambric: applied in
commerce to a fine texture of linen and cotton. [Littré derives from
_Baptiste_, the original maker; others from its use in wiping the heads of
children after baptism.]

BATLET, bat'let, _n._ a wooden mallet used by laundresses for beating
clothes. [Dim. of BAT.]

BATMAN, bat'man, baw'man, _n._ a man who has charge of a bathorse. [See
BATHORSE.]

[Illustration]

BATON, bat'on, BATOON, ba-toon', _n._ a staff or truncheon, esp. of a
policeman: a marshal's staff.--_v.t._ to strike with a baton.--_n._
BAT'ON-SIN'ISTER, a well-known heraldic indication of illegitimacy,
improperly called BAR-SINISTER, a diminutive of a bend-sinister, not
extending to the sides of the shield, so as to resemble a marshal's baton
laid diagonally over the family arms from left to right. [Fr. _bâton_--Low
L. _basto_, a stick; of unknown origin.]

BATRACHIA, ba-tr[=a]'ki-a, _n.pl._ the order of reptiles which includes the
frogs.--_adj._ and _n._ BATR[=A]'CHIAN. [From Gr. _batrachos_, a frog.]

BATSWING, bats'wing, _n._ a kind of gas-burner, with a slit at the top
which causes the flame to take the shape of a bat's wing.

BATTA, bat'ta, _n._ an allowance to officers in the British Indian army in
addition to their ordinary pay: subsistence money. [Hind.]

BATTAILANT, bat't[=a]l-ant, _adj._ (_Spens._) fighting.--_adj._ BAT'TAILOUS
(_arch._), war-like. [Fr. _bataillant_, pr.p. of _batailler_, to fight. See
BATTLE.]

BATTALIA, bat-t[=a]l'ya, _n._ the order of battle: the main body of an army
in array. [It. _battaglia_. Doublet of BATTLE.]

BATTALIA PIE, bat-t[=a]l'ya p[=i], titbits in a pie: articles like
pin-cushions, embroidered by nuns in convents with scenes from the Bible.
[Corrupted from Fr. _béatilles_, dim. formed from L. _beatus_.]

BATTALION, bat-al'yun, _n._ a body of soldiers consisting of several
companies: a body of men drawn up in battle-array. [Fr.; from root of
BATTLE.]

BATTELS, bat'lz, _n.pl._ an Oxford term signifying accounts for provisions
received from college kitchens and butteries: applied generally to the
whole of the sums for tuition, &c., charged in college accounts.--_v.i._
BAT'TILL, BAT'TEL (_Spens._), to fatten. [Late L. _batilli_, perh. conn.
with BATTLE, to feed.]

BATTEN, bat'n, _v.i._ to grow fat: to live in luxury.--_v.t._ (_obs._) to
fatten. [Ice. _batna_, to grow better--_bati_, advantage; cf. Dut. _baten_,
to avail.]

BATTEN, bat'n, _n._ a piece of board: a ledge, clamp: in ships, a strip of
wood used to fasten down the hatches.--_n._ BAT'TENING, battens forming a
structure. [Same as BATON.]

BATTER, bat'er, _v.t._ to beat with successive blows: to wear with beating
or by use: to attack with artillery.--_n._ ingredients beaten along with
some liquid into a paste: paste for sticking.--_ns._ BAT'TERING-CHARGE, the
full charge of powder for a cannon; BAT'TERING-RAM, an ancient engine for
battering down walls, consisting of a large beam with an iron head like
that of a ram. [O. Fr. _batre_ (Fr. _battre_), from the root of BAT.]

BATTER, bat'[.e]r, _n._ the inclination of a wall from the
perpendicular.--_v.i._ to slope backward from the perpendicular. [Perh.
from Fr. _battre_, to beat down.]

BATTERY, bat'[.e]r-i, _n._ (_Shak._) a wound: a number of cannon with their
equipment: the place on which cannon are mounted: the men and horses
attending one battery, constituting the unit in the artillery: an
instrument used in electric and galvanic experiments: (_law_) an assault by
beating or wounding: apparatus for preparing or serving meals.--CROSS
BATTERIES, two batteries commanding the same spot from different
directions; FLOATING BATTERY (see FLOAT); MASKED BATTERY, a battery in
action out of the enemy's view; TO CHANGE ONE'S BATTERY, to alter the
direction of attacking.

BATTLE, bat'l, _n._ a contest between opposing armies: a fight or
encounter: (_arch._) a body of troops in battle array, esp. in phrase 'main
battle.'--_v.i._ to contend in fight: to maintain, champion (with
_against_, _with_).--_ns._ BAT'TLE-AXE, -AX, a kind of axe once used in
battle; BAT'TLE-CRY, a war-shout; BAT'TLEFIELD, the place on which a battle
is fought; BAT'TLE-PIECE, a passage, or a painting, describing a
battle.--_adj._ BAT'TLE-SCARRED, scarred in battle.--_ns._ BAT'TLESHIP, a
war-ship of the first class; PITCHED'-BAT'TLE, a battle fought on chosen
ground.--BATTLE ROYAL, a general mêlée--HALF THE BATTLE, said of anything
which ensures success.--LINE OF BATTLE, troops in array for battle;
LINE-OF-BATTLE SHIP, a ship strong enough to form one of the line.--TO
JOIN, DO BATTLE, to fight. [Fr. _bataille_--_battre_, to beat. See BATTER.]

BATTLE, bat'l, _adj._ (_dial._) nourishing.--_v.t._ (_obs._) to feed. [Most
prob. from Ice. _bati_, improvement. See BATTEN.]

BATTLEDOOR, BATTLEDORE, bat'l-d[=o]r, _n._ a light bat for striking a ball
or shuttlecock.--NOT TO KNOW A B FROM A BATTLEDOOR, to be thoroughly
ignorant. [Sp. _batidor_, a beater, a washing-beetle; but this is
doubtful.]

BATTLEMENT, bat'l-ment, _n._ a wall or parapet on the top of a building
with openings or embrasures, originally used only on fortifications: the
towering roof of heaven,--_adj._ BAT'TLEMENTED, fortified with
battlements--also _pa.p._ BAT'TLED (_poet._).

BATTOLOGY, bat-ol'o-ji, _n._ repetition in speech or writing.--_adj._
BATTOLOG'ICAL. [Gr. _battos_, a person who repeated himself, and _legein_,
to speak.]

BATTUE, bat-t[=oo]', _n._ a method of hunting in which the woods are beaten
and the game driven from cover into some place for the convenience of the
shooters: any indiscriminate slaughter. [Fr.--_battre_, to beat.]

[Illustration]

BAUBLE, baw'bl, _n._ a trifling piece of finery: a child's plaything: a
stick surmounted by a head with ass's ears, and forming the mock emblem of
the court-jester: a piece of childish foolery: (_Shak._) a foolish
person.--_adj._ BAU'BLING (_obs._), trifling. [O. Fr. _babel_, prob. from
the root seen in L. _babulus_, a babbler.]

BAUDEKIN, bawd'i-kin, BAWDKIN, bawd'kin. Same as BALDACHIN.

BAUDRIC, bawd'rik. Same as BALDRICK.

BAUDRONS, bawd'runs, _n._ Scotch name for the cat. [Perh. of Celt. origin;
cf. Ir. _beadrac_, frolicsome, Gael. _beadrach_, a frolicsome girl.]

BAUK, BAULK. Same as BALK.

BAUSOND, bawz'ond, _adj._ (_obs._) having white spots, esp. on the
forehead, or a white stripe down the face.--_adj._ BAUS'ON-FACED (_Scott_),
with a face like a badger. [O. Fr. _bausant_ (It. _balzano_), black and
white spotted. Further ety. dub.]

BAUXITE, b[=o]'z[=i]t, _n._ a clay found at Les _Baux_, near Arles,
yielding alumina.--Also BEAU'XITE.

BAVARDAGE, bav-ar-d[=a]j', _n._ chattering. [Fr. _bavard_,
garrulous--_bave_, drivel.]

BAVIN, bav'in, _n._ a fagot of brushwood.--BAVIN WITS (_Shak._), wits that
blaze and die like bavins. [O. Fr. _baffe_, a fagot; but this is doubtful.]

BAWBEE, baw-b[=e]', _n._ a halfpenny: originally a Scotch coin of base
silver equivalent to six Scotch pennies. [Ety. dub., but very prob. derived
from a 16th-cent. Scotch mint-master, the laird of _Sillebawby_; others
identify with 'baby.']

BAWBLE. Same as BAUBLE.

BAWCOCK, baw'kok, _n._ (_Shak._) a fine fellow. [From Fr. _beau_, fine, and
_coq_, a cock.]

BAWD, bawd, _n._ a procurer or procuress of women for lewd purposes--_fem._
only since about 1700.--_n._ BAWD'RY.--_adj._ BAWD'Y, obscene, unchaste,
filthy.--_n._ BAWD'Y-HOUSE, a brothel. [Perh. abbrev. from BAWD'STROT, a
word for a pander, now obsolete, derived from O. Fr. _baldestrot_--_bald_,
gay, and perh. the Teut. root found in _strut_.]

BAWD, bawd, _n._ (_Shak._) a hare. [Perh. a contr. of BAUDRONS.]

BAWL, bawl, _v.i._ to shout or cry out loudly (with _at_, _against_).--_n._
a loud cry or shout.--_n._ BAWL'ER. [Perh. from Low L. _baulare_, to bark
like a dog; but cf. Ice. _baula_, to low like a cow, _baula_, a cow.]

BAWN, bawn, _n._ a fortification round a house: an enclosure for cattle.
[Ir. _bábhun_, enclosure.]

BAXTER. See BAKE.

BAY, b[=a], _adj._ reddish brown inclining to chestnut.--_n._ elliptical
for 'bay-horse.'--_n._ BAYARD (b[=a]'ard), a bay-horse: a name for any
horse generally, from 'Bayard,' the famous bay-coloured magic horse given
to Renaud by Charlemagne: a man recklessly blind to danger: a fellow bold
in his ignorance: a type of the knight, from _Bayard_ (1476-1524), 'the
knight without fear and without reproach.' [Fr. _bai_--L. _badius_,
chestnut-coloured.]

BAY, b[=a], _n._ an inlet of the sea with a wider opening than a gulf: an
inward bend of the shore. [Fr. _baie_--Low L. _baia_, a harbour.]

[Illustration]

BAY, b[=a], _n._ the space between two columns: (_Shak._) the space under
one house gable: any recess.--_n._ BAY'-WIN'DOW, any window forming a
recess.--_adj._ BAY'-WIN'DOWED. [O. Fr. _baée_--_baer_, to gape, be open;
prob. conn. with the foregoing word.]

BAY, b[=a], _n._ the laurel-tree: (_pl._) an honorary garland or crown of
victory, originally of laurel: literary renown.--_ns._ BAY'BERRY; BAY'-RUM,
an aromatic stimulant used for the skin and hair, and prepared by
distilling the leaves of the bay-berry (_Pimenta acris_) with rum, or
otherwise mixing the volatile oil of the leaves with alcohol. [O. Fr.
_baie_, a berry--L. _baca_.]

BAY, b[=a], _n._ barking, baying (esp. of a dog when in pursuit): the
combined cry of hounds in conflict with a hunted animal: used often of the
last stand of a hunted animal when it faces the hounds at close
quarters.--_v.i._ to bark (esp. of large dogs).--_v.t._ to bark at: to
utter by baying: to follow with barking: to bring to bay.--TO HOLD, KEEP AT
BAY, said of the hunted animal; TO STAND, BE, AT BAY, at close quarters.
[These senses show a confusion of two distinct words, according to Murray:
(1) to hold at bay = O. Fr. _tenir a bay_ = It. _tenere a bada_, _bay_,
_bada_, denoting the suspense indicated by the open mouth; (2) in the
phrase 'to stand at bay,' the word points to O. Fr. _abai_, barking,
_bayer_, to bark.]

BAY, BAYE, b[=a], _v.t._ (_Spens._) to bathe.

BAYADÈRE, b[=a]-ya-d[=e]r', _n._ a Hindu dancing-girl. [Fr.--Port.
_bailadeira_.]

BAYONET, b[=a]'on-et, _n._ a stabbing instrument of steel fixed to the
muzzle of a musket or rifle: military force: (_pl._) soldiers armed with
bayonets.--_v.t._ to stab with a bayonet. [Fr. _baïonnette_, perh. from
_Bayonne_, in France, where it was supposed to have been first made; others
derive from O. Fr. _bayon_, arrow.]

BAYOU, b[=a]'[=oo], _n._ name given to the marshy offshoots of lakes and
rivers, esp. in North America. [Perh. corrupted from Fr. _boyau_, gut.]

BAY-SALT, b[=a]'-sält, _n._ salt obtained by slow evaporation originally
from sea-water. [Prob. from BAY, an inlet, and SALT.]

BAZAAR, BAZAR, ba-zär', _n._ an Eastern marketplace or exchange: a fancy
fair in imitation of an Eastern bazaar. [Pers. _b[=a]z[=a]r_, a market.]

BDELLIUM, del'i-um, _n._ a kind of gum. [Gr. _bdellion_, used to translate,
but prob. unconnected with Heb. _b'd[=o]lakh_, Gen. ii. 12.]

BE, b[=e], _v.i._ to live: to exist: to have a certain state or
quality:--_pr.p._ b[=e]'ing; _pa.p._ been.--_n._ BE'-ALL (_Shak._), the
whole being. [A.S. _béon_; Ger. _bin_; Gael. _bi_, to exist; W. _byw_, to
live; Gr. _phu-ein_, L. _fui_, _fio_, Sans. _bhu_, to be, orig. meaning to
grow.]

BEACH, b[=e]ch, _n._ the shore of the sea or of a lake, esp. when sandy or
pebbly: the strand.--_v.t._ to haul a boat up on the beach.--_n._
BEACH'-COMB'ER, a long rolling wave: a drunken loafer about the wharfs in
Pacific seaports: a settler on a Pacific island who maintains himself by
pearl-fishery, and often by less reputable means.--_adjs._ BEACHED, having
a beach, driven on a beach; BEACH'Y, pebbly. [Orig. a prov. Eng. word for
shingle. The derivation from Ice. _bakki_, bank, is untenable.]

BEACON, b[=e]'kn, _n._ a fire on an eminence used as a sign of danger: a
hill on which such could be lighted: anything that warns of danger, esp. an
erection of stone, wood, or iron often bearing a light, and marking rocks
or shoals in rivers or navigable channels.--_v.t._ to act as a beacon to:
to light up: to mark by means of beacons.--_n._ FLOAT'ING-BEA'CON, a
light-ship. [A.S. _béacn_, a beacon, a sign.]

BEAD, b[=e]d, _n._ a little ball pierced for stringing, a series of which
forms the _rosary_ or _paternoster_, used in counting the prayers recited:
any small ball of glass, amber, &c. strung in a series to form a necklace:
a bead-like drop: the small knob of metal forming the front-sight of a
gun--whence the Americanism, TO DRAW A BEAD UPON = to take aim at:
(_archit._) a narrow moulding with semicircular section.--_v.t._ to furnish
with beads.--_v.i._ to form a bead or beads.--_adj._ BEAD'ED, furnished
with beads.--_ns._ BEAD'-HOUSE, a house for poor people who were required
to pray for the soul of the founder: an almshouse; BEAD'ING, a moulding in
imitation of beads.--_adj._ BEAD'-PROOF, of such proof or strength as to
carry beads or bubbles when shaken, as alcoholic liquors.--_ns._
BEAD'-ROLL, in pre-Reformation times, a roll or list of the dead to be
prayed for, hence a list of names, a long series: a rosary; BEADS'MAN,
BEDES'MAN, one employed to pray for others, or one endowed to do so:
(_Scot._) a public alms-man or licensed beggar:--_fem._
BEADS'WOMAN.--_adj._ BEAD'Y, bead-like, small and bright (of eyes): covered
with beads or bubbles.--TO SAY, TELL, COUNT ONE'S BEADS, to offer a prayer.
[A.S. _bed_, _gebed_, a prayer, from _biddan_, to pray. See BID.]

BEADLE, b[=e]d'l, _n._ a mace-bearer (esp. of the '_bedels_' or
'_bedells_,' official attendants of the Oxford and Cambridge
vice-chancellors): a petty officer of a church, college, parish, &c.: a
parish officer with the power of punishing petty offenders: in Scotland,
used of the 'church-officer' attending on the clergyman: (_obs._) a
messenger or crier of a court.--_ns._ BEAD'LEDOM, BEAD'LEHOOD, stupid
officiousness; BEAD'LESHIP, BED'ELSHIP, the office of beadle or bedel.
[A.S. _bydel_--_béodan_, to proclaim, to bid.]

BEADMAN. Same as BEADSMAN (q.v. under BEAD).

BEAGLE, b[=e]'gl, _n._ a small hound tracking by scent, formerly much used
in hunting hares, but now superseded by the harrier: a spy: a bailiff: a
small kind of shark.--The beagle was often followed by men on foot, hence
FOOT'-BEA'GLE. [Ety. unknown. The Fr. _bigle_ is borrowed from English. Dr
Murray suggests Fr. _bégueule_, from _béer_, to gape, and _gueule_,
throat.]

BEAK, b[=e]k, _n._ the bill of a bird: anything pointed or projecting: the
nose: in the ancient galley, a pointed iron fastened to the prow for
piercing the enemy's vessel: (_slang_) a magistrate.--_adj._ BEAKED
(b[=e]kt). [O. Fr. _bec_--Low L. _beccus_, of Celt. (Gaulish) origin.]

BEAKER, b[=e]k'[.e]r, _n._ a large drinking-bowl or cup, or its contents: a
glass vessel marked for measuring liquids, with a beak or pointed mouth,
used by chemists. [Scand. _bikarr_ (Scot. _bicker_), prob. from Low L.
_bicarium_, acc. to Diez from Gr. _bikos_, a drinking-bowl.]

BEAM, b[=e]m, _n._ a large and straight piece of timber or iron forming one
of the main supports against lateral pressure of a building, ship, &c.:
(_fig._) from the figure of the mote and the beam--Matt. vii. 3: any of the
transverse pieces of framing extending across a ship's hull, the greatest
width of a ship or boat: the part of a balance from which the scales hang:
the pole of a carriage: a cylinder of wood in a loom: a ray of
light.--_v.t._ to send forth light: to shine.--_n._ BEAM'-EN'GINE, a
steam-engine which has a beam connecting the piston-rod with the crank of
the wheel-shaft, as distinguished from one that has its piston-rod directly
attached to the crank.--_adv._ BEAM'ILY.--_n._ BEAM'INESS.--_adjs._
BEAM'LESS, without beams: emitting no rays of light; BEAM'Y, shining.--A
BEAM SEA, one rolling against the ship's side.--BEFORE THE BEAM, the
bearing of any object when seen more in advance than _on_ the beam; ABAFT
THE BEAM, the reverse.--LEE or WEATHER BEAM, the side away from _or_
towards the wind.--ON HER BEAM ENDS, a phrase applied to the position of a
ship when so much inclined to one side that the beams become nearly
vertical.--ON THE STARBOARD BEAM, applied to any distant point out at sea,
at right angles to the keel, and on the starboard or right-hand (as viewed
from the stern) side of the ship; ON THE PORT BEAM similarly applies to the
left hand. [A.S. _béam_, a tree, stock of a tree, a ray of light; Ger.
_baum_, a tree; Gr. _phyma_, a growth--_phy-ein_, to grow.]

BEAN, b[=e]n, _n._ the name of several kinds of leguminous plants and their
seeds: applied also to the seeds of some other plants, from their bean-like
form, as the Calabar bean, &c.--_ns._ BEAN'-FEAST, an annual dinner given
by employers to their hands, perhaps from there having been served on such
occasions _beans_ or a BEAN'-GOOSE, a species of goose said to be so called
from its fondness for devouring new-sown beans; BEAN'-KING, the king of the
festivities on Twelfth Night, chosen on his finding a bean hidden in the
Twelfth Cake. [A.S. _béan_; Ger. _bohne_, W. _ffäen_; L. _faba_.]

BEAR, b[=a]r, _v.t._ to carry or support: to endure: to admit of: to be
entitled to: to afford: to import: to manage: to behave or conduct one's
self: to bring forth or produce.--_v.i._ to suffer: to be patient: to have
reference to: to press (with _on_ or _upon_): to be situated:--_pr.p._
bear'ing; _pa.t._ b[=o]re; _pa.p._ b[=o]rne (but the _pa.p._ when used to
mean 'brought forth' is _born_).--_adj._ BEAR'ABLE, that may be borne or
endured.--_n._ BEAR'ABLENESS.--_adv._ BEAR'ABLY.--_ns._ BEAR'ER, one who or
that which bears, esp. one who assists in carrying a body to the grave: a
carrier or messenger; BEAR'ING, behaviour: situation of one object with
regard to another: relation: that which is borne upon an escutcheon:
(_mach._) the part of a shaft or axle in contact with its supports;
BEAR'ING-CLOTH, the mantle or cloth in which a child was carried to the
font; BEAR'ING-REIN, the fixed rein between the bit and the saddle, by
which a horse's head is held up in driving and its neck made to arch.--BEAR
HARD (_Shak._), to press or urge; BEAR IN HAND (_Shak._), to keep in
expectation, to flatter one's hopes; TO BEAR A HAND, to give assistance; TO
BEAR AWAY, to sail away; TO BEAR DOWN (with _upon_ or _towards_), to sail
with the wind; TO BEAR OUT, to corroborate; TO BEAR UP, to keep up one's
courage; TO BEAR UP FOR (_a place_), to sail towards; TO BEAR WITH, to make
allowance for; TO BE BORNE IN (upon the) MIND, to be forcibly impressed
upon it; TO BRING TO BEAR, to bring into operation (with _against_,
_upon_); TO LOSE ONE'S BEARINGS, to become uncertain as to one's position.
[A.S. _beran_; Goth. _bairan_, L. _ferre_, Gr. _pher-ein_, Sans. _bhri_.]

BEAR, an obsolete form of BIER.

BEAR, b[=a]r, _n._ a heavy quadruped of the order Carnivora, with long
shaggy hair and hooked claws: any rude, rough, or ill-bred fellow: one who
sells stocks for delivery at a future date, anticipating a fall in price so
that he may buy first at an advantage--opp. to _Bull_: the old phrase 'a
bearskin jobber' suggests an origin in the common proverb, 'to sell the
bearskin before one has caught the bear' (hence TO BEAR, to speculate for a
fall): (_astron._) the name of two constellations, the Great and the Little
Bear.--_ns._ BEAR'-BER'RY, a trailing plant of the heath family, a species
of the Arbutus; BEAR'BINE, a species of convolvulus, closely allied to the
bindweed; BEAR'-GAR'DEN, an enclosure where bears are kept; a rude,
turbulent assembly.--_adj._ BEAR'ISH, like a bear.--_ns._ BEAR'ISHNESS;
BEAR'-LEAD'ER, a person who leads about a bear for exhibition: the tutor or
governor of a youth at the university or on travel; BEAR'S'-BREECH, a
common name for plants of the genus Acanthus; BEAR'S'-EAR, a common English
name for the auricula; BEAR'S'-FOOT, a species of hellebore; BEAR'SKIN, the
skin of a bear: a shaggy woollen cloth for overcoats: the high fur cap worn
by the Guards in England; BEAR'-WARD, a warden or keeper of bears. [A.S.
_bera_; Ger. _bär_; cf. L. _fera_, a wild beast, akin to Gr. _th[=e]r_,
Æolian _ph[=e]r_.]

BEAR, b[=e]r, _n._ barley, applied in Scotland to the now little grown
variety _Hordeum hexastichon_. [A.S. _bere_.]

BEARD, b[=e]rd, _n._ the hair that grows on the chin and adjacent parts of
a grown man's face: the tuft on the lower jaw of a goat, seal, &c.: the
barbel of the cod, loach, &c.; prickles on the ears of corn: the barb of an
arrow: the gills of oysters, &c.--_v.t._ to take by the beard: to oppose to
the face.--_adj._ BEARD'ED, having a beard: prickly: barbed.--_n._
BEARD'-GRASS, a kind of bearded grass.--_adj._ BEARD'LESS. [A.S.; W.
_barf_, Ger. _bart_, Russ. _boroda_, L. _barba_.]

BEAST, b[=e]st, _n._ an irrational animal, as opposed to man: a four-footed
animal: a brutal person: the Beast, Antichrist in the Revelation--dim.
BEAST'IES.--_n.pl._ BEAST'-F[=A]'BLES, stories in which animals play human
parts--a widely-spread primitive form of literature, often surviving in
more or less developed forms in the more advanced civilisations.--_ns._
BEAST'HOOD; BEAST'LIHEAD (_Spens._), the state or nature of a beast,
beastliness; BEAST'LINESS.--_adj._ BEAST'LY, like a beast in actions or
behaviour: coarse: obscene: (_colloq._) vile, disagreeable. [O. Fr. _beste_
(Fr. _bête_)--L. _bestia_.]

BEASTINGS. Same as BIESTINGS.

BEAT, b[=e]t, _v.t._ to strike repeatedly: to break or bruise: to strike,
as bushes, in order to rouse game: to thrash: to overcome: to be too
difficult for: to spread flat and thin by beating with a tool, as gold by a
gold-beater--also TO BEAT OUT.--_v.i._ to give strokes repeatedly: to
throb: to dash, as a flood or storm:--_pr.p._ beat'ing; _pa.t._ beat;
_pa.p._ beat'en.--_n._ a recurrent stroke: a stroke recurring at intervals,
or its sound, as of a watch or the pulse: a round or course, as a
policeman's _beat_: a place of resort.--_adj._ weary: fatigued.--_adj._
BEAT'EN, made smooth or hard by beating or treading: trite: worn by
use.--_ns._ BEAT'ER, one that beats or strikes: one who rouses or beats up
game: a crushing instrument; BEAT'ING, the act of striking: chastisement by
blows: regular pulsation or throbbing: rousing of game: exercising the
brain.--BEATEN WORK, metal shaped by being hammered on an anvil or block of
the necessary shape.--DEAD BEAT, completely exhausted.--TO BEAT ABOUT THE
BUSH, to approach a subject in an indirect way; TO BEAT A RETREAT, to
retreat, originally to beat the drum as a signal for retreat; TO BEAT OFF,
to drive back; TO BEAT OUT, to work out fully, to make gold or silver leaf
out of solid metal; TO BEAT THE AIR, to fight to no purpose, or against an
imaginary enemy; TO BEAT THE BOUNDS, to trace out the boundaries of a
parish in a periodic survey or perambulation, certain natural objects in
the line of journey being formally struck with a rod, and sometimes also
the boys whipped to make them remember; TO BEAT THE BRAINS, to puzzle one's
brains about something; TO BEAT THE TATTOO (_mil._), to sound the drum for
evening roll-call; TO BEAT UP, to alarm by a sudden attack: to disturb: to
pay an untimeous visit to any one--also in 'to beat up for recruits,' to go
about a town to enlist men. [A.S. _béatan_, pa.t. _béot_.]

BEATH, b[=e]th, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to bathe. [A.S. _bethian_, to foment.]

BEATIFY, b[=e]-at'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to make blessed or happy: to declare to
be in the enjoyment of eternal happiness in heaven.--_adjs._ BEATIF'IC,
-AL, making supremely happy.--_adv._ BEATIF'ICALLY.--_n._
BEATIFIC[=A]'TION, act of beatifying: (_R.C. Church_) a declaration by the
Pope that a person is blessed in heaven, authorising a certain definite
form of public reverence payable to him--the first step to
canonisation.--BEATIFIC VISION, a glimpse of the glory of heaven, esp. that
which first bursts upon the disembodied soul. [L. _beatus_, blessed, and
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

BEATITUDE, b[=e]-at'i-t[=u]d, _n._ heavenly happiness, or happiness of the
highest kind: (_pl._) sayings of Christ in Matt. v., declaring the
possessors of certain virtues to be blessed. [L. _beatitudo_--_beatus_,
blessed.]

BEAU, b[=o], _n._ a man attentive to dress or fashion: a fop or dandy: a
lover:--_pl._ BEAUX (b[=o]z):--_fem._ BELLE.--_n._ BEAU'-ID[=E]'AL, ideal
excellence, or an imaginary standard of perfection: the person in which
such is realised.--_adj._ BEAU'ISH.--_ns._ BEAU'-MONDE, the gay or
fashionable world; _Beaupere'_ (_Spens._), a term of courtesy for 'father,'
esp. of ecclesiastical persons: a companion. [Fr. _beau_, _bel_--L.
_bellus_, fine, gay, as if for a _benulus_, dim. of _benus_ = _bonus_,
good.]

BEAUJOLAIS, b[=o]-zh[=o]-l[=a], _n._ a kind of red wine produced in
South-eastern France. [From _Beaujolais_, a subdivision of the old province
of Lyonnais.]

BEAUNE, b[=o]n, _n._ a red wine of Burgundy. [From the town of _Beaune_.]

BEAUTY, b[=u]'ti, _n._ a pleasing combination of qualities in a person or
object: a particular grace or excellence: a beautiful person, esp. a woman,
also applied collectively to the beautiful women of a special place:
(_pl._) beautiful passages or extracts from the poets.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to
make beautiful.--_adj._ BEAU'TEOUS, full of beauty: fair: handsome.--_adv._
BEAU'TEOUSLY.--_ns._ BEAU'TEOUSNESS; BEAU'TIFIER, one who or that which
beautifies or makes beautiful.--_adj._ BEAU'TIFUL, fair: with qualities
that give delight to the senses, esp. the eye and ear, or which awaken
admiration in the mind.--_adv._ BEAU'TIFULLY.--_v.t._ BEAU'TIFY, to make
beautiful: to grace: to adorn.--_v.i._ (_rare_) to become beautiful, or
more beautiful.--_ns._ BEAU'TY-SLEEP, the sleep before midnight, considered
the most refreshing; BEAU'TY-SPOT, a patch placed on the face to heighten
or draw attention to a woman's beauty; a foil, or anything that emphasises
beauty by contrast. [O. Fr. _biaute_ (Fr. _beauté_)--Low L.
_bellitat-em_--L. _bellus_.]

BEAUXITE. See BAUXITE.

BEAVER, b[=e]v'[.e]r, _n._ an amphibious rodent quadruped valuable for its
fur: the fur of the beaver: a hat made of the beaver's fur: a hat: a glove
of beaver fur.--_adj._ BEAV'ERISH (_Carlyle_), like a beaver, merely
instinctive.--_n._ BEAV'ERY, a place where beavers are kept. [A.S. _befer_,
_beofor_; Dut. _bever_, Ger. _biber_, Gael, _beabhar_, L. _fiber_.]

BEAVER, b[=e]v'[.e]r, _n._ in medieval armour, the covering for the lower
part of the face, the visor being that for the upper part--later the
movable beaver was confounded with the visor.--_adj._ BEAV'ERED. [So called
from a fancied likeness to a child's bib. O. Fr. _bavière_, from _bave_,
slaver.]

BEBEERU, b[=e]-b[=e]'r[=oo], _n._ the native name of the green-heart tree
of Guiana.--_n._ BEBEERINE (b[=e]-b[=e]'rin), an alkaloid yielded by it,
and used as a substitute for quinine.

BEBLUBBERED, be-blub'[.e]rd, _p.adj._ disfigured by weeping [Pfx. _be-_,
and BLUBBER.]

BECALL, be-kawl', _v.t._ to call names, miscall.

BECALM, be-käm', _v.t._ to make calm, still, or quiet.--_p.adj._ BECALMED',
motionless from want of wind. [Pfx. _be-_, and CALM.]

BECAME, be-k[=a]m', _pa.t._ of BECOME.

BECAUSE, be-kawz', _adv._ and _conj._ because of: for the reason that: on
account of: for (followed by _of_). [Prep. _by_, and CAUSE.]

BECCAFICO, bek-a-f[=e]'ko, _n._ a small bird of the family of Sylviadæ or
Warblers, considered a delicacy by the Italians:--_pl._ BECCAFI'COES. [It.,
from _beccare_ to peck, and _fico_, a fig.]

BECHANCE, be-chans', _v.t._ to happen by chance: to befall--_adv._ by
chance: accidentally. [A.S. _be-_, by, and CHANCE.]

BECHARM, be-chärm', _v.t._ to charm: to enchant.

BÊCHE-DE-MER, b[=a]sh'-d[.e]-m[=a]r, _n._ the trepang or sea-slug, a
species of Holothuria, much esteemed in China as a food delicacy. [Fr.]

BECK, bek, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as BEAK.

BECK, bek, _n._ a brook. [Ice. _bekkr_; Ger. _bach_.]

BECK, bek, _n._ a sign with the finger or head: a nod: (_Scot._) a gesture
of salutation.--_v.i._ to make such a sign.--_v.t._ to call by a nod.--AT
ONE'S BECK, subject to one's will. [A contr. of BECKON.]

BECKET, bek'et, _n._ (_naut._) a loop of rope having a knot at one end and
an eye at the other: a large hook, or a wooden bracket used to keep loose
tackle or spars in a convenient place. [Prob. Dut. _bogt_, _bocht_, a
'bend' of rope.]

BECKON, bek'n, _v.t._ to nod or make a sign to. [A.S. _bíecnan_--_béacn_, a
sign. See BEACON.]

BECLOUD, be-klowd', _v.t._ to obscure by clouds: to dim.

BECOME, be-kum', _v.i._ to pass from one state to another: to come to be:
to be the fate or end of (followed by _of_).--_v.t._ to suit or befit, to
grace or adorn fittingly (with _dat._ object):--_pa.t._ bec[=a]me'; _pa.p._
become'.--_adj._ BECOM'ING, suitable to: graceful.--_adv._
BECOM'INGLY.--_n._ BECOM'INGNESS. [A.S. _becuman_. See COME.]

BECURL, be-kurl', _v.t._ to curl.

BED, bed, _n._ a couch or place to sleep on: a plot in a garden: a place in
which anything rests, in carpentry, architecture, &c.: conjugal union, the
marriage-bed, matrimonial rights and duties: the channel of a river:
(_geol._) a layer or stratum.--_v.t._ to place in bed, as a couple after a
wedding: to provide a bed, or to make a bed, for: to sow or plant: to lay
in layers.--_v.i._ to cohabit or use the same bed with another:--_pr.p._
bed'ding; _pa.p._ bed'ded.--_ns._ BED'CHAMBER (see BED'ROOM); BED'DING, a
collective name for the mattress, bed-clothes, &c., also litter for
cattle.--_adj._ BED'FAST, confined to bed.--_ns._ BED'FELLOW, a sharer of
the same bed; BED'MAKER, the name at Cambridge and elsewhere for those who
make the beds and sweep the rooms in college; BED'-OF-HON'OUR, the grave of
a soldier who has fallen in battle; BED'-OF-JUS'TICE (Fr. _lit. de
justice_), the king's throne in the Parlement of Paris, also a sitting at
which the king was present, chiefly for the registration of his own
decrees; BED'PLATE (_mech._), the foundation plate of an engine, lathe,
&c.; BED'POST, a post forming an angle of a bedstead, often in former days
high enough to support a canopy; BED'PRESSER (_Shak._), a heavy, lazy
fellow.--_adjs._ BED'RID, BED'RIDDEN, confined to bed by age or sickness:
worn out.--_ns._ BED'RIGHT (_Shak._), the privilege of the marriage-bed;
BED'ROCK, the solid rock underneath superficial formations; BED'ROOM, a
room in which there is a bed: a sleeping apartment--_Bedchamber_ was the
earlier form.--_n.pl._ BED'-SORES, painful ulcers that often arise in a
long confinement to bed, esp. over the bony prominences of the body--the
lower parts of the spine, the haunch bones, the heel, and the elbow.--_ns._
BED'-STAFF, a staff or stick formerly used about a bed, in old times a
handy weapon, whence perhaps the phrase, 'in the twinkling of a bed-staff;'
BED'STEAD, a frame for supporting a bed; BED'STRAW, the name applied to a
genus of the Rubiaceæ, of which eleven species are found in England, the
most familiar our Lady's Bedstraw, or Yellow Bedstraw (_Galium verum_),
sometimes called Cheese Rennet from its property of curdling milk;
BED'SWERVER (_Shak._), one who is false to his marriage vow; BED'TICK, the
case in which feathers, hair, chaff, &c. are put for bedding.--_adv._
BED'WARD, in the direction of bed: towards bedtime.--_n._ BED'WORK
(_Shak._), work easily performed, as if done in bed.--BED AND BOARD, food
and lodging: full connubial relations; BED OF DOWN, or ROSES, any easy or
comfortable place.--LORDS OF THE BEDCHAMBER, twelve officers in the British
royal household who wait in turn upon the sovereign's person; in the reign
of a queen the office is performed by ladies.--TO BE BROUGHT TO BED, to be
confined in child-birth (with _of_); TO KEEP ONE'S BED, to remain in bed;
TO LIE IN THE BED ONE HAS MADE, to have to accept the consequences of one's
own conduct; TO MAKE A BED, to put a bed in order after it has been used.
[A.S. _bed_; Ger. _bett_, Ice. _bedr_.]

BEDABBLE, be-dab'l, _v.t._ to dabble or wet. [Pfx. _be-_, and DABBLE.]

BEDAD, be-dad', _interj._ an Irish minced oath, from _begad_ = by God.

BEDAGGLE, be-dag'l, _v.t._ to soil by dragging along the wet ground.

BEDARKEN, be-dark'n, _v.t._ to cover with darkness.

BEDASH, be-dash', _v.t._ to bespatter with water.

BEDAUB, be-dawb', _v.t._ to daub over or smear with any dirty matter.

BEDAZZLE, be-daz'l, _v.t._ to dazzle or overpower by any strong
light.--_pa.p._ BEDAZ'ZLED, BEDAZED', stupefied, besotted.--_n._
BEDAZ'ZLEMENT.

BEDE. Same as BEAD, a prayer.

BEDEAFEN, be-def'n, _v.t._ to make deaf: to stun.

BEDECK, be-dek', _v.t._ to deck or ornament.

BEDEGUAR, bed'e-gar, _n._ a soft spongy gall found on the branches of some
species of roses, esp. the sweet-brier, called also the sweet-brier sponge.
[Through Fr. from Pers. and Ar. _b[=a]d[=a]-war_, lit. 'wind-brought.']

BEDEL, b[=e]'dl, BEDELL, be-del', archaic forms of BEADLE (q.v.), still
used at Oxford and Cambridge.

BEDESMAN. Same as BEADSMAN (q.v. under BEAD).

BEDEVIL, be-dev'il, _v.t._ to throw into confusion: to 'play the devil'
with: to torment: to treat with devilish malignity.--_pass._ to be
possessed of a devil, to be devil-rid.--_n._ BEDEV'ILMENT.

BEDEW, be-d[=u]', _v.t._ to moisten gently, as with dew.

BEDIGHT, be-d[=i]t', _adj._ (_poet._) adorned. [Pfx. _be-_, and DIGHT.]

BEDIM, be-dim', _v.t._ to make dim or dark.--_pa.p._ BEDIMMED'.

BEDIZEN, be-d[=i]z'n, _v.t._ to dress gaudily.--_adj._ BEDIZ'ENED.--_n._
BEDIZ'ENMENT.

BEDLAM, bed'lam, _n._ an asylum for lunatics: a madhouse: a place of
uproar.--_adj._ fit for a madhouse.--_ns._ BED'LAMISM, anything
characteristic of madness; BED'LAMITE, a madman. [Corrupted from
_Bethlehem_ (St Mary of Bethlehem), the name of a priory in London,
afterwards converted into a madhouse.]

BEDOUIN, bed'[=oo]-in, _n._ the name given to those Arabs who live in tents
and lead a nomadic life. [Fr.--Ar. _b[=a]d[=a]win_, dwellers in the
desert.]

BEDRAGGLE, be-drag'l, _v.t._ to soil by dragging in the wet or dirt--most
common, the _p.adj._ BEDRAG'GLED. [See DRAGGLE.]

BEDRAL, bed'ral, _n._ a beadle.--Also BED'ERAL. [A Scand. form of BEADLE.]

BEDRENCH, be-drensh', _v.t._ to drench or wet thoroughly.

BEDROP, be-drop', _v.t._ to drop upon.--_pa.p._ BEDROPT', sprinkled as with
drops: strewn.

BEDUCK, be-duk', _v.t._ to duck or plunge under water.

BEDUIN, a form of BEDOUIN.

BEDUNG, be-dung', _v.t._ to manure: to befoul with dung.

BEDUST, be-dust', _v.t._ to cover with dust.

BEDWARF, be-dwawrf', _v.t._ to make dwarfish.

BEDYE, be-d[=i]', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to dye or stain.

BEE, b[=e], _n._ a four-winged insect that makes honey: (_U.S._) a
gathering of persons to unite their labour for the benefit of one
individual or family, or for some joint amusement or exercise, as 'a
quilting bee,' 'a husking bee,' 'a spelling bee' (from the bee's habit of
combined labour).--Compound words are BEE'-FLOW'ER, BEE'-GAR'DEN,
BEE'-HOUSE, BEE'-MAS'TER.--_ns._ BEE'-BREAD, the pollen of flowers
collected by bees as food for their young; BEE'-EAT'ER, a brightly-plumaged
family of birds nearly allied to the kingfisher, which feeds on bees;
BEE'-GLUE, the soft glutinous matter by which bees fix their combs to the
hive; BEE'HIVE, a case or box in which bees are kept, of straw-work, wood,
&c.--Scotch _Bee-skep_.--_adj._ shaped like a beehive, dome-shaped.--_ns._
BEE'-LINE, the most direct road from one point to another, like the
honey-laden bee's way home to the hive; BEE'-MOTH, a species of moth whose
larvæ are very destructive to young bees; BEES'WAX, the wax secreted by
bees, and used by them in constructing their cells.--_v.t._ to polish with
beeswax.--_n._ BEES'WING, a filmy crust of tartar formed in port and some
other wines after long keeping.--_adj._ BEES'WINGED, so old as to show
beeswing.--A BEE IN ONE'S BONNET, a whimsical or crazy fancy on some point.
[A. S. _béo_; Ger. _biene_.]

BEECH, b[=e]ch, _n._ a common forest tree with smooth silvery-looking bark
and small edible nuts.--_adj._ BEECH'EN.--_ns._ BEECH'-MAST, the mast or
nuts of the beech-tree, which yield a valuable oil; BEECH'-OIL, oil
expressed from the nuts of the beech-tree. [A.S. _bóece_, _béce_; Ger.
_buche_, L. _fagus_, Gr. _ph[=e]gos_--from root of _phag-ein_, to eat.]

BEEF, b[=e]f, _n._ the flesh of an ox or cow:--_pl._ BEEVES, used in
original sense, oxen.--_adj._ consisting of beef.--_ns._ BEEF'-EAT'ER
(b[=e]f'-[=e]t'[.e]r), a popular name for a yeoman of the sovereign's
guard, also of the warders of the Tower of London [the obvious ety. is the
right one, there being no such form as _buffetier_, connected with
_buffet_, a sideboard, as often stated]; BEEF'INESS; BEEF'STEAK, a thick
slice of beef for broiling or frying; BEEF'TEA, a stimulating rather than
nutritious food for invalids, being the juice of beef strained off, after
simmering chopped beef in water.--_adjs._ BEEF'-WIT'TED, BEEF'-BRAINED,
dull or heavy in wits: stupid.--_n._ BEEF'-WOOD, an Australian wood, of
reddish colour, used in cabinetwork.--_adj._ BEEF'Y, like beef, fleshy,
stolid. [O. Fr. _boef_ (Fr. _boeuf_)--L. _bos_, _bovis_; cf. Gr. _bous_,
Gael. _bò_, Sans. _go_, A.S. _cú_.]

BEELZEBUB, b[=e]-el'ze-bub, _n._ the name under which the Philistines at
Ekron worshipped their god _Baal_ or _Bel_: (_New Test._) the prince of the
evil spirits. [Heb. _ba'al z'b[=u]b_, fly-lord.]

BEEN, b[=e]n, _pa.p._ of BE.

BEENAH, b[=e]'na, _n._ a primitive form of marriage (the name taken from
Ceylon) in which the man goes to live with his wife's family--he is an
unimportant person in the family, and the children are not counted his, but
belong to the family and kindred of the wife.

BEER, b[=e]r, _n._ an alcoholic beverage made by fermentation from malted
barley flavoured with hops. It was anciently distinguished from ale by
being hopped; now _beer_ is the generic name of malt liquor, including ale
and porter.--_ns._ BEER'-EN'GINE, BEER'-PUMP, a machine for drawing beer up
from the casks to the bar; BEER'-HOUSE, a house where beer or malt liquors
are sold; BEER'INESS; BEER'-MON'EY, money given to soldiers in the British
army, in lieu of beer and spirits.--_adj._ BEER'Y, of or affected by
beer.--BEER AND SKITTLES, a phrase used vaguely for Bohemian pleasures,
from a simple form supposed to be a rustic ideal.--BITTER BEER = pale ale,
a highly hopped beer made from the very finest selected malt and hops; MILD
or SWEET ale being of greater gravity or strength, and comparatively
lightly hopped; BLACK BEER, a kind of beer made at Danzig, black and
syrupy; SMALL BEER, weak beer, hence trifling things, as in the familiar
phrase, 'to think no small beer of one's self.' [A.S. _béor_; Ger. and Dut.
_bier_, Ice. _bjorr_.]

BEESTINGS, b[=e]st'ingz, _n._ the first milk drawn from a cow after
calving. [A.S. _býsting_, _béost_; Ger. and Dut. _biest_.]

BEET, b[=e]t, _n._ a plant with a carrot-shaped succulent root, eaten as
food, from which sugar is extracted.--_ns._ BEET'-FLY, a two-winged insect,
which deposits its eggs on beet or mangel-wurzel, and whose larvæ are
injurious to the plant; BEET'ROOT, the root of the beet plant. [A.S. _béte_
(Fr. _bette_)--L. _b[=e]ta_.]

BEET, BETE, b[=e]t, _v.t._ (_obs._ except _dial._) to improve, mend, to
kindle a fire, to rouse. [A.S. _bóetan_, _bétan_; cf. _bót_, BOOT.]

BEETLE, b[=e]'tl, _n._ an order of insects technically known as Coleoptera,
usually with four wings, the front pair forming hard and horny covers for
those behind, which alone are used in flight.--The BLACK BEETLE or
cockroach is not a true beetle. [M.E. _bityl_--A.S. _bitula_, _bitela_,
_bítan_, to bite.]

BEETLE, b[=e]'tl, _n._ a heavy wooden mallet used for driving wedges,
crushing or beating down paving-stones, or the like: a wooden pestle-shaped
utensil for mashing potatoes, beating linen, &c.--_n._ BEE'TLE-HEAD, a
heavy, stupid fellow.--_adj._ BEE'TLE-HEAD'ED. [A.S. _bíetel_; cog. with
_béatan_, to beat.]

BEETLE-BROWED, b[=e]'tl-browd, _adj._ with overhanging or prominent brow:
scowling.--_v.i._ BEE'TLE, to jut, to hang over--first used by
Shakespeare.--_n._ BEET'LING.--_p.adj._ jutting out: prominent:
overhanging. [Dr Murray notes that the word is first found in the compound
_bitel_-browed, in the 14th century, and favours the explanation, 'with
eyebrows like a beetle's'--i.e. projecting eyebrows. See BEETLE (1).]

BEEVES, b[=e]vz, _n.pl._ cattle, oxen. [See BEEF.]

BEFALL, be-fawl', _v.t._ to fall or happen to: to occur to.--_v.i._ to
happen or come to pass: (_Spens._) to fall in one's way:--_pr.p._
befall'ing; _pa.t._ befell'; _pa.p._ befall'en. [A.S. _befeallan_. See
FALL.]

BEFANA, BEFFANA, be-fä'na, _n._ an Epiphany present or gift--a corruption
of _Epiphania_, which name in Italy has become personified for children as
a toy-bringing witch or fairy called _La Befana_.

BEFIT, be-fit', _v.t._ to fit, or be suitable to: to be proper to, or right
for:--_pr.p._ befit'ting; _pa.p._ befit'ted.--_adj._ BEFIT'TING.--_adv._
BEFIT'TINGLY. [Pfx. _be-_, and FIT.]

BEFLOWER, be-flow'[.e]r, _v.t._ to cover or besprinkle with flowers.

BEFOAM, be-f[=o]m', _v.t._ to bespatter or cover with foam.

BEFOGGED, be-fogd', _adj._ enveloped in fog: confused.

BEFOOL, be-f[=oo]l', _v.t._ to make a fool of, or deceive: to treat as a
fool.

BEFORE, be-f[=o]r', _prep._ in front of (_time_ or _place_): in presence or
sight of (_Before_ God): under the cognisance of, as in before the court,
the magistrate, or the house: previous to: in preference to: superior
to.--_adv._ in front: sooner than hitherto.--_conj._ previous to the time
when (often with _that_).--_advs._ BEFORE'HAND, before the time: by way of
preparation; BEFORE'TIME, in former time.--TO BE BEFOREHAND WITH, to
forestall in any action. [A.S. _beforan_. See FORE.]

BEFORTUNE, be-for't[=u]n, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to happen to, to befall.

BEFOUL, be-fowl', _v.t._ to make foul: to soil.

BEFRIEND, be-frend', _v.t._ to act as a friend to: to favour.

BEFRINGE, be-frinj', _v.t._ to adorn with fringes.

BEG. Same as BEY.

BEG, beg, _v.i._ to ask alms or charity, esp. habitually (with _of_,
_from_; _for_, of the thing asked).--_v.t._ to ask earnestly: to beseech:
to pray: to take for granted what ought to have been proved, esp. in the
phrase in logic, 'to beg the question'--the fallacy of the _Petitio
Principii_:--_pr.p._ beg'ging; _pa.p._ begged.--_n._ BEG'GAR, one who begs:
one who lives by begging: a mean fellow, a poor fellow--often used with a
playful and even affectionate sense.--_v.t._ to reduce to beggary: to
exhaust or impoverish: (_fig._) to go beyond the resources of, as of
description.--_ns._ BEG'GARDOM, the fraternity of beggars;
BEG'GARLINESS.--_adj._ BEGGARLY, poor: mean: worthless.--_adv._
meanly.--_ns._ BEG'GAR-MY-NEIGH'BOUR, a game at cards which goes on till
one of the players has gained all the other's cards; BEG'GARY, extreme
poverty.--_adv._ BEG'GINGLY.--TO BEG OFF, to obtain another's release
through entreaty, to seek that one's self may be relieved of some penalty
or liability.--TO GO A-BEGGING, to be in want of a purchaser, or of a
person to fill it (of a situation, &c.). [The ety. is very obscure; the
words _beg_ and _beggar_ first appear in the 13th century, and Dr Murray
thinks the most likely derivation is from the O. Fr. _begart_, _begard_,
and _begar_ (L. _beghardus_ = _beghard_), or its synonym _beguine_ and
derivative verb _beguigner_, _beguiner_, to act the beguin. The _Beghards_
or _Beguines_ were a lay mendicant order, and in the 13th century
mendicants calling themselves by these names swarmed over Western Europe.]

BEGAD, be-gad', _interj._ a minced oath, softened from 'By God.'

BEGAN, b[=e]-gan', _pa.t._ of BEGIN.

BEGEM, be-jem', _v.t._ to adorn, as with gems.

BEGET, be-get', _v.t._ to produce or cause: to generate: to produce as an
effect, to cause:--_pr.p._ beget'ting; _pa.t._ begat', begot'; _pa.p._
begot', begot'ten.--_n._ BEGET'TER, one who begets: a father: the agent
that occasions or originates anything. [A.S. _begitan_, to acquire. See
GET.]

BEGHARD. See BEG.

BEGIFT, be-gift', _v.t._ to present with gifts.

BEGILD, be-gild', _v.t._ to gild: to cover or overlay with gold-leaf.

BEGIN, be-gin', _v.i._ to take rise: to enter on something new: to
commence.--_v.t._ to enter on: to commence (with _at_, _with_,
_upon_):--_pr.p._ begin'ning; _pa.t._ began'; _pa.p._ begun'.--_ns._
BEGIN'NER, one who begins: one who is beginning to learn or practise
anything; BEGIN'NING, origin or commencement: rudiments--(_Spens._)
BEGINNE'.--_adj._ BEGIN'NINGLESS. [A.S. _beginnan_ (more usually
_onginnan_), from _be_, and _ginnan_, to begin.]

BEGIRD, be-gird', _v.t._ to gird or bind with a girdle; to surround or
encompass (_with_):--_pa.t._ begirt', begird'ed; _pa.p._ begirt'. [A.S.
_begyrdan_. See GIRD.]

BEGLERBEG, b[.e]g'l[.e]r-b[.e]g, _n._ the governor of a Turkish province,
in rank next to the grand vizier. [Turk., lit. 'bey of beys.']

BEGLOOM, be-gl[=oo]m', _v.t._ to render gloomy.

BEGNAW, be-naw', _v.t._ to gnaw or bite, to eat away.

BEGONE, be-gon', _interj._ lit. be gone! be off! get away! In WOE'-BEGONE',
beset with woe, we have the _pa.p._ of A.S. _begán_, to go round, to beset.

BEGONIA, be-g[=o]n'ya, _n._ a genus of plants cultivated in our greenhouses
for their pink flowers and their remarkable unequal-sided and often
coloured leaves--'Elephant's Ears,' 'Angel's Wings.' [Named from the
botanist Michel _Begon_, 1638-1710.]

BEGORED, be-g[=o]rd', _adj._ (_Spens._) besmeared with gore.

BEGOT, be-got', BEGOTTEN, be-got'n, _pa.p._ of BEGET.

BEGRIME, be-gr[=i]m', _v.t._ to grime or soil deeply.

BEGRUDGE, be-gruj', _v.t._ to grudge: to envy any one the possession of.

BEGUILE, be-g[=i]l', _v.t._ to cheat or deceive: to divert attention from
anything tedious or painful: to divert or amuse: to wile any one into some
course.--_ns._ BEGUILE'MENT; BEGUIL'ER.--_adv._ BEGUIL'INGLY. [See GUILE.]

BEGUINES, beg'in (see BEG).--_n._ BEGUINAGE (beg'in-[=a]j), an
establishment for _Beguines_.

BEGUM, b[=e]'gum, _n._ a Hindu princess or lady of rank. [Urdu _begam_.]

BEGUN, be-gun', _pa.p._ of BEGIN.

BEHALF, be-häf', _n._ favour or benefit: cause: sake, account: part--only
in phrases 'on,' 'in behalf of,' 'on his behalf.' [M. E. _behalve_--A.S.
_be healfe_, by the side. See HALF.]

BEHAPPEN, be-hap'n, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to happen to.

BEHAVE, be-h[=a]v', _v.t._ to bear or carry, to conduct (with
_self_).--_v.i._ to conduct one's self, also to conduct one's self well: to
act.--_n._ BEHAVIOUR (be-h[=a]v'yür), conduct: manners or deportment, esp.
good manners: general course of life: treatment of others.--TO BE UPON
ONE'S BEHAVIOUR, to be placed where one's best behaviour is politic or
necessary. [Formed, according to Dr Murray, in 15th century from _be-_ and
HAVE; apparently unconnected with A.S. _behabban_.]

BEHEAD, be-hed', _v.t._ to cut off the head.--_ns._ BEHEAD'AL (_rare_);
BEHEAD'ING, the act of cutting off the head.

BEHELD, be-held', _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BEHOLD.

BEHEMOTH, b[=e]'he-moth, _n._ an animal described in the book of Job,
usually taken to be the hippopotamus. [Either the pl. of Heb. _behêmâh_, a
beast, or a Hebraistic form of the Egyptian _p-ehe-mout_, 'water-ox.']

BEHEST, be-hest', _n._ command: charge. [A.S. _beh['æ]s_, a promise. See
HEST.]

BEHIGHT, be-h[=i]t', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to promise, to entrust, to speak to,
to command, to reckon or esteem to be:--_pr.p._ beh[=i]ght'ing; _pa.t._
beh[=o]te'; _pa.p._ beh[=i]ght.--_n._ (_obs._) a vow, a promise. [A.S.
_behátan_, _be-_, and _hátan_, to call.]

BEHIND, be-h[=i]nd', _prep._ at the back of (_place_, or as _support_):
remaining after or coming after (_time_, _rank_, _order_): inferior to, or
not so far advanced as.--_adv._ at the back, in the rear: backward:
past.--_adj._ or _adv._ BEHIND'HAND, being behind: tardy, or in arrears of
debt, &c.: clandestine. [A.S. _behindan_; Ger. _hinten_. See HIND.]

BEHOLD, be-h[=o]ld', _v.t._ to look upon: to contemplate.--_v.i._ to look:
to fix the attention:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ beheld'.--_imper._ or _interj._
see! lo! observe!--_adj._ BEHOLD'EN, bound in gratitude: obliged (with
_to_).--_n._ BEHOLD'ER, one who beholds: an onlooker.--_adj._ BEHOLD'ING
(_Shak._), beholden.--_n._ (_Shak._) sight, contemplation. [A.S.
_behealdan_, to hold, observe--pfx. _be-_, and _healdan_, to hold.]

BEHOOF, be-h[=oo]f', _n._ benefit: convenience (with _to_, _for_, _on_).

BEHOT, BEHOTE (_Spens._) _pa.t._ of BEHIGHT.

BEHOVE, BEHOOVE, be-h[=oo]v, _v.t._ to be fit, right, or necessary for--now
only used impersonally with _it_.--_adj._ BEHOVE'FUL, useful:
profitable.--_adv._ BEHOVE'FULLY (_obs._). [M. E. _behóf_, dat. behove;
A.S. _behófian_, to be fit, to stand in need of.]

BEHOWL, be-howl', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to howl at. Warburton first suggested
this as an emendation for 'behold' in _Midsummer Night's Dream_, V. 379.

BEIGE, b[=a]zh, _n._ a woollen fabric made of undyed wool. [Fr.]

BEIN, b[=e]n, _adj._ and _adv._ (_Scot._) comfortable: well off: well
found: (_slang_) good.--_n._ BEIN'NESS. [M. E. _bene_, of dubious origin;
the derivation has been sought in Scand. _beinn_, or in L. _bene_, Fr.
_bien_.]

BEING, b[=e]'ing, _n._ existence: substance: essence: any person or thing
existing.--_adj._ B[=E]'ING, existing, present.--_adj._
B[=E]'INGLESS.--_n._ B[=E]'INGNESS. [From the _pr.p._ of BE.]

BEINKED, b[=e]-inkt', _p.adj._ smeared with ink.

BEJADE, be-j[=a]d', _v.t._ (_obs._) to tire out.

BEJAN, b[=e]'jan, _n._ a freshman at the universities of Aberdeen and St
Andrews, and formerly in several continental universities. [Fr. _bejaune_,
a novice, from _bec jaune_, 'yellow beak,' a term used for a nestling or
unfledged bird.]

BEJESUIT, be-j[.e]z'[=u]-it, _v.t._ to initiate or seduce into Jesuitism.

BEJEWEL, be-j[=oo]'[.e]l, _v.t._ to deck with jewels.

BEKAH, b[=e]'ka, _n._ (_B._) a half-shekel (4.39 drs. avoir.). [Heb.]

BEKISS, be-kis', _v.t._ to cover with kisses.

BEKNAVE, be-n[=a]v', _v.t._ to call or treat as a knave.

BEKNOWN, b[=e]-n[=o]n', _p.adj._ known, acquainted.

BELABOUR, be-l[=a]'bur, _v.t._ to beat soundly.

BEL-ACCOYLE, bel-ak-koil', _n._ (_Spens._) favourable or kind reception.
[O. Fr. _bel acoil_, fair welcome. See ACCOIL.]

BELACE, be-l[=a]s', _v.t._ to adorn with lace.

BELAMOUR, bel'a-m[=oo]r, _n._ (_Spens._) a gallant: a fair lady: a kind of
flower. [Fr. _bel amour_, fair love.]

BELAMY, bel'a-mi, _n._ (_Spens._) a good or intimate friend. [Fr. _bel
ami_, fair friend.]

BELATE, be-l[=a]t', _v.t._ to make late: to retard:--_pr.p._ bel[=a]t'ing;
_pa.p._ bel[=a]t'ed.--_p.adj._ BEL[=A]T'ED, made too late: out of date:
benighted.--_n._ BEL[=A]T'EDNESS.

BELAUD, be-lawd', _v.t._ to laud or praise highly.

[Illustration]

BELAY, be-l[=a]', _v.t._ (_naut._) to fasten a running rope by coiling it
round a cleat or BELAY'ING-PIN: to make fast: (_Spens._) to lay ornament
round anything.--BELAY THERE (_naut. slang_), hold! that is enough. [A.S.
_belecgan_; Ger. _belegen_, Dut. _beleggen_. See LAY.]

BELCH, belch, belsh, _v.t._ to void wind from the stomach by the mouth: to
eject violently: to cast up, as of the smoke from a volcano or a
cannon.--_n._ eructation. [A.S. _bealcian_; Dut. _balken_.]

BELCHER, bel'sher, _n._ a neckerchief with dark-blue ground, mottled with
white spots, each having a dark-blue spot in the centre. [From Jim
_Belcher_, a famous English boxer.]

BELDAM, BELDAME, bel'dam, _n._ an old woman, esp. an ugly one: a hag, a
furious woman: (_obs._) a grandmother. [Formed from _dam_, mother, and
_bel-_, expressing relationship. Cf. _belsire_.]

BELEAGUER, be-l[=e]g'[.e]r, _v.t._ to lay siege to.--_n._ BELEAG'UERMENT.
[Dut. _belegeren_, to besiege--_be_, and _leger_, camp. See LEAGUER.]

BELEE, be-l[=e]', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to place on the lee-side of.

BELEMNITE, bel'em-n[=i]t, _n._ a fossil pointed like a dart, being the
internal shell of a genus of cephalopods, formerly known as _Thunder-bolt_,
_Thunder-stone_, _Elf-bolt_. [Gr. _belemnit[=e]s_--_belemnon_, a dart.]

BELFRY, bel'fri, _n._ the part of a steeple or tower in which bells are
hung: a bell-tower, sometimes standing apart: a movable wooden tower, used
in the Middle Ages in attacking a fortification.--_adj._ BEL'FRIED, having
a belfry. [Orig. and properly a watch-tower, from O. Fr. _berfroi_--Mid.
High Ger. _berchfrit_--_frid_, _frit_, a tower, _bergan_, to protect.]

BELGARD, bel-gärd', _n._ (_Spens._) fair or kind looks. [It. _bel guardo_,
lovely look.]

BELGIAN, bel'ji-an, _adj._ belonging to _Belgium_, a country of
Europe.--_n._ a native of Belgium.

BELGIC, bel'jik, _adj._ pertaining to the _Belgæ_ who anciently possessed
Belgium, or to _Belgium_. [L. _Belgicus_--_Belgæ_, the Belgians.]

BELGRAVIAN, bel-gr[=a]'vi-an, _adj._ belonging to _Belgravia_ (a
fashionable part of London), or to fashionable life: aristocratic.

BELIAL, b[=e]l'yal, _n._ a name for the devil, and, in Milton, for one of
the fallen angels. Not a proper name in Old Test. [Heb. _b'li-ya`al_,
_b'li_, without _ya`al_, usefulness.]

BELIE, be-l[=i]', _v.t._ to give the lie to: to speak falsely of: to
present in a false character: to counterfeit: to be false to: falsify:
(_Shak._) to fill with lies:--_pr.p._ bely'ing; _pa.p._ bel[=i]ed'. [A.S.
_be_, and LIE.]

BELIEVE, be-l[=e]v', _v.t._ to regard as true: to trust in.--_v.i._ to be
firmly persuaded of anything: to exercise faith (with _in_, _on_): to think
or suppose.--_n._ BELIEF', persuasion of the truth of anything: faith: the
opinion or doctrine believed: intuition, natural judgment (as used by some
philosophers).--_adjs._ BELIEF'LESS; BELIEV'ABLE, that may be
believed.--_n._ BELIEV'ER, one who believes: a professor of
Christianity.--_p.adj._ BELIEV'ING, trustful.--_adv._ BELIEV'INGLY.--THE
BELIEF (_arch._), the Apostles' Creed.--TO MAKE BELIEVE, to pretend. [M. E.
_bileven_--_bi-_, _be-_, and _leven_. Murray says that _believe_ is an
erroneous spelling of the 17th century, prob. after _relieve_. The A.S.
form _geléfan_ survived to the 14th century; the present compound, which
superseded it, appears in the 12th century.]

BELIKE, be-l[=i]k', _adv._ probably: perhaps. [A.S. pfx. _be-_, and LIKE.]

BELITTLE, be-lit'l, _v.t._ to make small: to cause to appear small, to
depreciate or disparage.--_n._ BELIT'TLEMENT.--_adj._ BELIT'TLING. [Pfx.
_be-_, and LITTLE.]

BELIVE, be-l[=i]v', _adv._ (_Scot._) with speed: soon, erelong. [M. E. _bi
life_; _be_, _bí_, by, _life_, dat. of _l[=i]f_, life.]

BELL, bel, _n._ a hollow vessel of metal, which gives forth a ringing sound
when struck by the tongue or clapper suspended inside--as in _church-bell_,
_hand-bell_, _alarm-bell_, _night-bell_, _marriage-bell_, &c.: a corolla
shaped like a bell: the body of a Corinthian or composite capital, without
the surrounding foliage: anything bell-shaped, as in _diving-bell_,
_bell-glass_, the _bell_ or outward-turned orifice of a trumpet, &c.: a
bell rung to tell the hour: (_naut._) the bell struck on shipboard every
half-hour as many times as there are half-hours of the watch elapsed--'two
bells,' 'three bells,' &c., meaning that there are two or three half-hours
past; the watch of four hours is eight bells.--_v.t._ to furnish with a
bell, esp. in TO BELL THE CAT, to take the leading part in any hazardous
movement, from the ancient fable of the mice who proposed to hang a warning
bell round the cat's neck.--_ns._ BELL'COTE (_archit._), an ornamental
[Illustration] structure made to contain one or two bells, and often
crowned by a small spire; BELL'-CRANK, a rectangular lever in the form of a
crank, used for changing the direction of bell-wires; BELL'-FOUND'ER, one
who founds or casts bells; BELL'-GLASS, a bell-shaped glass for sheltering
flowers; BELL'-HANG'ER, one who hangs and repairs bells; BELL'MAN, one who
rings a bell, esp. on the streets, before making public announcements: a
town-crier; BELL'-MET'AL, the metal of which bells are made--an alloy of
copper and tin; BELL'-PUNCH, a hand-punch containing a signal-bell, used
for punching a hole in a ticket in order to keep a record of the number of
fares taken; BELL'-RING'ER, one whose business it is to ring a bell on
stated occasions: a performer with musical hand-bells; BELL'-ROPE, the rope
by which a bell is rung.--_adj._ BELL'-SHAPED.--_ns._ BELL'-TOW'ER, a tower
built to contain one or more bells, a campanile; BELL'-TUR'RET, a turret
containing a bell-chamber, usually crowned with a spire; BELL'-WETH'ER, the
leading sheep of a flock, on whose neck a bell is hung: (_fig._) any loud,
turbulent fellow, esp. the leader of a mob.--BELL, BOOK, AND CANDLE, a
phrase popularly used in reference to a form of excommunication ending with
the words, 'Do to [shut] the book, quench the candle, ring the bell.'--TO
BEAR or CARRY OFF THE BELL, to have or to gain the first place. [A.S.
_belle_; cog. with Dut. _bel_.]

BELL, bel, _n._ a bubble formed in a liquid. [Ety. dub.; cf. Dut. _bel_, a
bubble in water, perh. from L. _bulla_, bubble in water.]

BELL, bel, _v.i._ to bellow, roar: to utter loudly.--_n._ the cry of a stag
at rutting-time. [A.S. _bellan_, to roar; cf. Ger. _bellen_.]

BELLADONNA, bel'la-don-na, _n._ the deadly nightshade or dwale, all parts
of which are narcotic and poisonous from the presence therein of the
alkaloid atropia: the drug prepared from the foregoing. [It. _bella donna_,
fair lady; one property of belladonna is to enlarge the pupil, and so add a
brilliance to the eyes.]

BELLARMINE, bel'lar-m[=e]n, _n._ a large stoneware drinking jug with a big
belly and a narrow neck, decorated with a bearded face, originally that of
Cardinal _Bellarmine_, made in mockery by the Dutch Protestants.

BELLE, bel, _n._ a handsome woman: the chief beauty of a place: a fair lady
generally. [Fr. _belle_--L. _bella_, _bellus_.]

BELLES-LETTRES, bel-let'r, _n.pl._ polite or elegant literature, including
poetry, fiction, criticism, æsthetics, &c.--_ns._ BELLET'RIST,
BELLET'TRIST.--_adj._ BELLETRIS'TIC. [Fr., lit. 'fine letters.']

BELLIBONE, bel'i-b[=o]n, _n._ (_Spens._) a beautiful and good woman.

BELLICOSE, bel'ik-[=o]s, _adj._ contentious, war-like.--_adv._
BEL'LICOSELY.--_n._ BELLICOS'ITY. [L. _bellicosus_.]

BELLIED, bel'lid, _p.adj._ with a belly, esp. a big belly, pot-bellied:
bulging: puffed out. [See BELLY.]

BELLIGERENT, bel-ij'[.e]r-[.e]nt, _adj._ carrying on regular war.--_n._ a
party or person waging such.--_n._ BELLIG'ERENCY. [L. _belligerant-em_,
_belliger[=a]re_, to wage war.]

BELLONA, bel'l[=o]-na, _n._ the Roman goddess of war--hence (_fig._) a
woman of great spirit and vigour.

BELLOW, bel'l[=o], _v.i._ to roar like a bull: to make any violent outcry,
often with sense of contempt or ridicule: to shout aloud: to roar, as of
cannon, the ocean, &c.--with objective, to give forth a loud sound.--_n._
the roar of a bull: any deep sound or cry. [M. E. _belwen_; there is an
A.S. _bellan_, to roar.]

BELLOWS, bel'l[=o]z, or bel'lus, _n.pl._ an instrument for producing a
current of air so as to blow up a fire, either in a kitchen, a furnace, or
a forge--or for producing the current of air by which the pipes and reeds
of an organ are sounded: (_fig._) that which fans the fire of hatred,
jealousy, &c.: the lungs. [Same as BELLY (q.v.); now used only in _pl._,
the sing. not having survived the 15th century.]

BELLY, bel'li, _n._ the part of the body between the breast and the thighs,
containing the bowels: the stomach, as the receptacle of the food: the
bowels proper: the womb or uterus: the interior of anything: the bulging
part of anything, as a bottle, or any concave or hollow surface, as of a
sail: the inner or lower surface of anything, as opposed to the _back_, as
of a violin, &c.--_adj._ ventral, abdominal: (_theol._) belonging to the
flesh, carnal.--_v.i._ to swell or bulge out.--_ns._ BEL'LY-BAND, a
saddle-girth: a band fastened to the shafts of a vehicle, and passing under
the belly of the horse drawing it; BEL'LYFUL, a sufficiency; BEL'LY-GOD,
one who makes a god of his belly, a glutton.--_p.adj._ BEL'LYING.--_n._
BEL'LY-TIM'BER, provisions. [M. E. _bali_, _bely_--A.S. _bælig_, _belig_;
_bælg_, _belg_, bag.]

BELOMANCY, bel'o-man-si, _n._ a kind of divination by means of arrows. [Gr.
_belos_, a dart, _manteia_, divination.]

BELONG, be-long', _v.i._ to go along with: to pertain to: to be one's
property: to be a part of, or appendage of, or in any way connected with:
to be specially the business of: (_U.S._) to be a native of, or have a
residence in.--_n.pl._ BELONG'INGS, circumstances or relations of any
person: possessions: persons connected, relatives: accessories. [_Bi-_,
_be-longen_, intens. of _longen_, with pfx. _be-_. See LONG.]

BELOVED, be-luvd', or be-luv'ed, _p.adj._ much loved, very dear--often
compounded with _well-_; _best-_, &c.--_n._ one who is much loved.--_adj._
BELOV'ING (_Shak._) = loving.

BELOW, be-l[=o]', _prep._ beneath in place, rank, or quality: underneath:
not worthy of.--_adv._ in a lower place: (_fig._) on earth, or in hell, as
opposed to heaven. [Pfx. _be-_, and adj. LOW.]

BELT, belt, _n._ a girdle, zone, or band: such a piece, as of leather, worn
by way of ornament, or given as a prize or badge of victory in wrestling or
the like: a broad strip of anything, different in colour or material: that
which confines or restrains: (_geog._) a strait.--_v.t._ to surround with a
belt, or to invest formally with such, as in knighting a man: to encircle:
to thrash with a belt.--_p.adj._ BELT'ED, wearing a belt, of a knight:
marked with a belt, as the 'belted kingfisher.'--_n._ BELT'ING, flexible
belts for the transmission of motion in machinery, made of leather,
indiarubber, &c.--as in _chainbelt_, _crossed belt_, _endless belt_, &c.; a
thrashing.--TO HOLD THE BELT, to hold the championship in wrestling,
boxing, or the like. [A.S. _belt_; Ice. _belti_, Gael. _balt_, L.
_balteus_.]

BELTANE, bel't[=a]n, _n._ an ancient Celtic heathen festival, held in the
beginning of May, when bonfires were lighted on the hills: the first day of
May (O.S.)--one of the four old quarter-days of Scotland, the others being
Lammas, Hallowmas, and Candlemas.--_adj._ in _Beltane_ games, &c. [Gael.
_bealltainn_, _beilteine_; usually explained as 'Beal's fire,' _Beal_ being
a supposed Celtic deity who has been courageously identified with the Baal
or Bel of the Phoenicians and other Semitic peoples, and Gael. _teine_,
fire. But even this last is doubtful.]

BELUGA, be-l[=oo]'ga, _n._ the white whale, one of the dolphin family,
closely allied to the narwhal, 12 to 16 feet long, of creamy-white colour,
found in droves round Greenland and all over the Arctic seas: applied also
to a great Russian sturgeon--the _Acipenser Huso_. [Russ.]

BELVEDERE, bel've-d[=e]r, _n._ a pavilion or raised turret or lantern on
the top of a house, open for the view, or to admit the cool evening breeze:
a summer-house on an eminence in a park or garden. [It. _belvedere_; _bel_,
beautiful, _vedere_, a view.]

BEMA, b[=e]'ma, _n._ the tribune or rostrum from which Athenian orators
made their speeches--hence the apse or chancel of a basilica. [Gr.
_b[=e]ma_, a step.]

BEMAD, be-mad', _v.t._ to madden.

BEMAUL, be-mawl', _v.t._ to maul thoroughly.

BEMAZED, be-m[=a]zd', _p.adj._ stupefied, bewildered.

BEMBEX, bem'beks, _n._ a genus of solitary sand-wasps, with broad heads and
very large eyes, noted for their making a loud buzz during their rapid
flight. [Gr. _bembix_.]

BEMEAN, be-m[=e]n', _v.t._ to make mean, to lower or debase: (_obs._) to
signify.

BEMIRE, be-m[=i]r', _v.t._ to soil with mire.--_p.adj._ BEMIRED'.

BEMOAN, be-m[=o]n', _v.t._ to lament: bewail: to pity.--_v.i._ to
grieve.--_ns._ BEMOAN'ER; BEMOAN'ING.

BEMOCK, be-mok', _v.t._ to mock at, to deride.

BEMOIL, be-moil', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to bemire, to bedraggle.

BEMONSTER, be-mon'ster, _v.t._ to make monstrous: to regard or treat as a
monster.

BEMOUTH, be-mowth', _v.i._ to declaim, to overpraise.

BEMUD, be-mud', _v.t._ to bespatter with mud: to confuse.

BEMUDDLE, be-mud'l, _v.t._ to confuse or muddle completely.

BEMUFFLE, be-muf'l, _v.t._ to wrap or muffle up completely.

BEMUSE, be-m[=u]z', _v.t._ to put in confusion: stupefy.

BEN, ben, _n._ a mountain peak. [Gael. _beann_.]

BEN, ben, _prep._ and _adv._ in toward the inner apartment of a
house.--_n._ the inner apartment of a house, as opposed to the _But_ or
kitchen through which one must generally pass first.--TO BE FAR BEN WITH
ONE, to be on terms of great intimacy or friendship with; TO LIVE BUT AND
BEN, to live respectively in these rooms, in close neighbourhood with any
one. [M. E. _binne_--A.S. _binnan_, within.]

BENCH, bensh, _n._ a long seat or form with or without a back: a seat in a
boat: a mechanic's work-table: a judge's seat: the body or assembly of
judges: a tribunal: the dignity of holding an official seat, as the 'bench
of bishops,' the 'civic bench.'--_v.t._ to place on or furnish with
benches.--_ns._ BENCH'ER, a senior member of an inn of court; BENCH'ERSHIP;
BENCH'-MARK, a surveyor's mark cut on a rock, gatepost, wall, or the like,
into which a crooked iron is set so as to form a bench or temporary support
for the levelling instrument; BENCH'-WAR'RANT, one issued by a judge rather
than a justice or magistrate. [A.S. _benc_; cog. with Ger. and Dut.
_bank_.]

[Illustration]

BEND, bend, _v.t._ to curve or bow: to make crooked: to turn or
incline--mostly in passive, to be inclined _to_, _towards_, to be given
_to_: to subdue: to direct to a certain point: to apply closely, to strain,
to nerve one's self to: (_naut._) to tie, fasten, make fast.--_v.i._ to be
crooked or curved: to incline in any direction: to stoop: to lean: to bow
in submission (with _to_, _before_, _towards_):--_pa.p._ bend'ed or
bent.--_n._ a curve or crook: the bent part of anything; (_her._) one of
the nine ordinaries, consisting of the space contained between two parallel
lines crossing the shield diagonally from dexter chief to sinister base. It
is said to occupy a fifth part of the shield unless charged, when it
occupies a third part--its diminutives are the _Bendlet_, _Cotise_, and
_Ribbon_.--BEND SINISTER, an occasionally occurring variety of the bend,
drawn from sinister chief to dexter base. [Old Eng. _bendan_.]

BEND, bend, _n._ in leather, half a butt cut lengthwise.

BENEATH, be-n[=e]th', _prep._ under, or lower in place: inside of, behind:
unworthy the dignity of, unbecoming. [A.S. _bi-nathan_.]

BENEDICITE, ben-[=e]-dis'i-te, _n._ the canticle beginning _'Benedicite_
omnia opera Domini' ('O all ye works of the Lord'), from the Apocryphal
_Song of the Three Holy Children_--in the Anglican morning service an
alternate to the _Te Deum_: the blessing before a repast.

BENEDICT, ben'e-dikt, _n._ a common name for a newly married man, esp. a
bachelor who has long held out against marriage, but at last
succumbed--from _Benedick_ in Shakespeare's _Much Ado about
Nothing_.--_adj._ blessed: benign.

BENEDICTINE, ben-e-dik'tin, _adj._ pertaining to St Benedict or his
monastic rule.--_n._ a Black Friar or monk of the order founded at Monte
Cassino by St _Benedict_ of Nursia (480-543), which became famous for its
learning: a cordial or liqueur resembling Chartreuse, distilled at Fécamp
in Normandy--once distilled by Benedictine monks.

BENEDICTION, ben-e-dik'shun, _n._ a solemn invocation of the divine
blessing on men or things--a priestly benediction is defined by Romanists
as a formula of imperative prayer which transmits a certain grace or virtue
to the object over which it is pronounced: a brief and popular service in
the Romish Church, consisting of certain canticles and antiphons sung in
presence of the host, and concluding with the priest making the sign of the
cross over the people with the monstrance, and giving in silence the
benediction of the most holy sacrament.--_adj._ BENEDICT'ORY.--_n._
BENEDICT'US, the canticle of Zacharias (Luke, i. 68-79), used in the Roman
service of matin-lauds, and occurring after the second lesson in Anglican
matins.--_p.adj._ BENEDIGHT' (_Longfellow_), blessed.--APOSTOLIC
BENEDICTION, that given in 2 Cor. xiii. 14.

BENEFACTION, ben-e-fak'shun, _n._ the act of doing good: a good deed done
or benefit conferred: a grant or endowment.--_n._ BENEFAC'TOR, one who
gives a benefit to another, esp. one who leaves a legacy to some charitable
or religious institution, a patron:--_fem._ BENEFAC'TRESS.--_adj._
BENEFAC'TORY. [L. _benefaction-em_.]

BENEFICE, ben'e-fis, _n._ any kind of church promotion or dignity, esp.
with cure of souls, such as rectories, vicarages, and other parochial
cures, as distinguished from bishoprics, deaneries, cathedral preferments,
&c.: an ecclesiastical living.--_adj._ BEN'EFICED, possessed of a benefice.
[Through Fr. from L. _beneficium_.]

BENEFICENCE, be-nef'i-sens, _n._ active goodness: kindness: charity: a
beneficent gift.--_n._ BENEFIC'ENCY (_obs._).--_adjs._ BENEF'ICENT;
BENEFICEN'TIAL.--_adv._ BENEF'ICENTLY. [L. _beneficentia_.]

BENEFICIAL, ben-e-fish'al, _adj._ useful; advantageous: (_law_) enjoying
the usufruct of property.--_adj._ BENEF'IC, of good influence
astrologically: beneficent, kindly.--_adv._ BENEFIC'IALLY.--_ns._
BENEFIC'IALNESS; BENEFIC'IARY, a legal term to denote a person who enjoys,
or has the prospect of enjoying, any interest or estate held in trust by
others. [L. _beneficium_.]

BENEFIT, ben'e-fit, _n._ a kindness: a favour: any advantage, natural or
other: a performance at a theatre, the proceeds of which go to one of the
company.--_v.t._ to do good to.--_v.i._ to gain advantage (with
_from_),--_ns._ BEN'EFIT-OF-CLER'GY, in old English law, the exemption of
the persons of ecclesiastics from criminal process before a secular judge,
they being responsible only to their ordinary. This privilege, at first
limited to those in actual orders, was in 1350 extended to all manner of
clerks, and in later practice to all who could read, whether of clergy or
laity; BEN'EFIT-OF-IN'VENTORY (_Scots law_), a legal privilege whereby an
heir secured himself against unlimited liability for his ancestor, by
giving up within the _annus deliberandi_ an inventory of his heritage or
real estate, to the extent of which alone was the heir liable.--BENEFIT
SOCIETIES, associations for mutual benefit chiefly among the labouring
classes, better known as _Friendly societies_. [M. E. _benfet_, through Fr.
from L. _benefactum_.]

BENET, be-net', _v.t._ to catch in a net, to ensnare.

BENET, ben'et, _n._ an exorcist, the third of the four lesser orders in the
Roman Church. [Through Fr. from L. _benedict-us_, blessed.]

BENEVOLENCE, ben-ev'ol-ens, _n._ disposition to do good: an act of
kindness: generosity: a gift of money, esp. for support of the poor: (_Eng.
hist._) a kind of forced loan or contribution, levied by kings without
legal authority, first so called under Edward IV. in 1473.--_adj._
BENEV'OLENT, charitable, generous, well disposed to.--_adv._ BENEV'OLENTLY.
[Through Fr. from L. _benevolentia_.]

BENGALI, ben-gaw'l[=e], _adj._ of or belonging to _Bengal_.--_n._ a native
of Bengal: the language of Bengal.--_n._ BENGAL'-LIGHT, a brilliant
signal-light used at sea in a case of shipwreck, and in ordinary pyrotechny
for illuminating a district of country--prepared from nitre, sulphur, and
the black sulphide of antimony.

BENIGHTED, be-n[=i]t'ed, _adj._ overtaken by night: involved in darkness,
intellectual or moral: ignorant.--_v.t._ BENIGHT', to involve in such
darkness: to cloud with disappointment.--_ns._ BENIGHT'ENING; BENIGHT'ER;
BENIGHT'ING; BENIGHT'MENT. [Pfx. _be-_ and NIGHT.]

BENIGN, ben-[=i]n', _adj._ favourable, esp. in astrology, as opposed to
_malign_: gracious: kindly: (_med._) of a mild type, as opposed to
malignant: salubrious.--_n._ BENIG'NANCY, benignant quality.--_adj._
BENIG'NANT, kind: gracious: beneficial.--_adv._ BENIG'NANTLY.--_n._
BENIG'NITY, goodness of disposition: kindness: graciousness: favourable
circumstances--of climate, weather, disease, planets.--_adv._ BENIGN'LY.
[O. Fr. _benigne_--L. _benignus_, for _benigenus_; _bene_, well, _genus_,
born.]

BENISON, ben'izn, _n._ benediction, blessing, esp. blessing of God. [O. Fr.
_beneiçun_--L. _benediction-em_.]

BENITIER, b[=a]-n[=e]'ti[=a], _n._ the vase or vessel for holy water in
R.C. churches, known in England as the holy-water font, vat, pot, stone,
stock, or stoup. [Fr.--Low L. _benedictarium_--L. _benedictus_.]

BENJAMIN, ben'jä-min, _n._ a kind of overcoat formerly worn by men.
[Suggested possibly by 'Joseph's coat.' The Gipsy _béngari_, 'waistcoat,'
has been proposed as an etymon.]

BENJAMIN, ben'jä-min, _n._ gum benjamin, an essence made from
benzoin.--_n._ BEN'JAMIN-TREE, a North American aromatic shrub, with
stimulant tonic bark and berries: the tree which yields benzoin--_Styrax
Benzoin_. [A corr. of BENZOIN.]

BENNET, ben'et, _n._ the herb Bennet or common avens (_Geum urbanum_), a
yellow-flowered wayside plant throughout Europe. [Through Fr. from L.
'herba _benedicta_,' the flower being a protective against the devil.]

BENNET, ben'et, _n._ the same as BENT, indeed an earlier form.

BENT, bent, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BEND.

BENT, bent, _n._ leaning or bias: tendency: intention: natural inclination
of the mind towards anything: the condition of being bent, curved form:
(_rare_) slope or declivity: (_Shak._) a cast, as of the eye: the extent to
which a bow may be bent--degree of tension, capacity of endurance, as in
the phrase 'to the top of one's bent' = to the full measure of one's
inclination. [See BEND.]

BENT, bent, _n._ any stiff or wiry grass: the old dried stalks of grasses:
a special genus (_Agrostis_) containing about sixty species of grasses, all
slender and delicate in appearance, and some useful as pasture-grasses and
for hay: a place covered with such, a heath: a hillside.--Often
BENT'-GRASS.--BEN'NET is a variant, a name applied to the wild
barley-grass.--_adj._ BENT'Y.--TO TAKE TO THE BENT (_Scot._), to fly to the
moors, to escape from some danger by flight. [A.S. _beonet_, found in
place-names, as _Beonetléah_, Bentley; the history is obscure, but the word
is doubtless Teut.; cf. Ger. _binse_.]

BENTHAMISM, ben'tham-izm, _n._ a name applied to the social and political
doctrines of Jeremy _Bentham_ (1748-1832), whose leading principle is the
doctrine of utility, that happiness is identical with pleasure, summed up
in Priestley's famous phrase, 'the greatest happiness of the greatest
number.'

BENUMB, be-num', _v.t._ to make insensible or powerless: to stupefy (now
chiefly of _cold_): to deaden the feelings: to paralyse
generally.--_p.adj._ BENUMBED'.--_ns._ BENUMBED'NESS, BENUMB'MENT. [Pfx.
_be-_ and NUMB.]

BENZENE, ben'z[=e]n, _n._ a compound of carbon and hydrogen, discovered by
Faraday in 1825, in a tarry liquid resulting from the distillation of oil.
It is found amongst the products of the destructive distillation of a great
many organic bodies, but the most abundant source is coal-tar. It must not
be confounded with _benzine_ or _benzoyl_, which names have at different
times been used for benzene.--BEN'ZINE is the name given to a distillate
from American petroleum, which is much used as a substitute for turpentine,
and for dissolving oils and fats; BEN'ZOYL is the commercial name applied
to a mixture of substances, including benzene and its homologues.--BEN'ZOL
is synonymous with benzene, while BEN'ZOLINE is a name applied to benzine
and impure benzene indiscriminately.

BENZOIN, ben'z[=o]-in, or -zoin, _n._ gum benjamin, the aromatic and
resinous juice of the _Styrax Benzoin_ of Java and Sumatra. It is used in
perfumery, in pastilles, and for incense, and its compound tincture yields
Friar's Balsam or Jesuit's Drops, and is used in making court-plaster. [In
the 16th century, BENJOIN. Most prob. through It. from Ar. _lub[=a]n
j[=a]w[=i]_, frankincense of Java, Sumatra, &c.]

BEPAINT, be-p[=a]nt', _v.t._ to paint over: to colour.

BEPAT, be-pat', _v.t._ to pat frequently, to beat.

BEPATCHED, be-patcht', _p.adj._ mended with patches: wearing patches on the
face by way of adornment.

BEPEARL, be-p[.e]rl', _v.t._ to cover over with pearls.

BEPELT, be-p[.e]lt', _v.t._ to pelt vigorously.

BEPEPPER, be-pep'[.e]r, _v.t._ to pelt with a rain of shot or of blows.

BEPESTER, be-pest'[.e]r, _v.t._ to vex or pester greatly.

BEPITY, be-pit'i, _v.t._ to pity greatly.

BEPLUMED, be-pl[=oo]md', _p.adj._ adorned with feathers.

BEPOMMEL, be-pom'el, _v.t._ to pommel soundly.

BEPOWDER, be-pow'd[.e]r, _v.t._ to powder over.

BEPRAISE, be-pr[=a]z', _v.t._ to praise extravagantly.

BEPROSE, be-pr[=o]z', _v.t._ to reduce to prose: to discuss in prose, and
tediously.

BEPUFF, be-puf', _v.t._ to puff out: to praise beyond measure.

BEQUEATH, be-kw[=e]th', _v.t._ to leave personal property by will to
another: to transmit to posterity, to leave behind: to commit or entrust to
any one.--_adj._ BEQUEATH'ABLE.--_ns._ BEQUEATH'AL, BEQUEATH'MENT. [A.S.
_becweðan_; pfx. _be-_,and _cweðan_, to say. See QUOTH.]

BEQUEST, be-kwest', _n._ act of bequeathing: that which is bequeathed, a
legacy. [M. E. _bi-queste_--A.S. _bi'-cwiss_; _bi'-_, a form of pfx. _be-_,
_qithan_, to say. See QUOTH.]

BERATE, be-r[=a]t', _v.t._ (_U.S._) to scold or chide vigorously.

BERBER, b[.e]r'b[.e]r, _n._ and _adj._ a member of one of the Hamitic
tribes inhabiting the mountainous regions of Barbary and the northern
portions of the Great Desert, originally occupying the whole southern coast
of the Mediterranean: the language spoken by the Berbers. [Derived by Barth
either from the name of their supposed ancestor, _Ber_, which we recognise
in the L. A_-fer_, an African; or from the Gr. and L. term _Barbari_.]

BERE, another spelling of BEAR, barley (q.v.).

BEREAN, b[=e]-r[=e]'an, _n._ one of an extinct Scottish sect of the 18th
century, named from the people of _Berea_ (Acts, xvii. 11, who derived all
knowledge of God from the Bible, but differed little from ordinary
Calvinists.

BEREAVE, be-r[=e]v', _v.t._ to rob a person of anything valued: to leave
destitute:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bereaved'--the latter also BEREFT'.--_adj._
BEREAVED', robbed by death of some dear relative or friend.--_n._
BEREAVE'MENT, the fact or state of being so bereaved. [A.S. _beréafian_, to
plunder. See REAVE.]

BERET, BERRET, b[.e]r'et, _n._ a flat woollen cap worn by the Basques.
[Fr.]

BERG, berg, _n._ a mass or mountain of ice.--_ns._ BERG'FALL, the fall of a
mountain rock; BERG'FIELD, an expanse of ice covered with bergs. [See
ICEBERG.]

BERGAMASK, b[.e]r'ga-mask, _adj._ of or pertaining to _Bergamo_, whose
natives are clownish in manners and dialect.--_n._ a rustic dance of
theirs.

BERGAMOT, b[.e]r'ga-mot, _n._ a kind of citron whose aromatic rind yields
the well-known oil of Bergamot, used in making pomades, fragrant essences,
eau de Cologne, liqueurs, &c.: the essence so extracted. [From the town of
_Bergamo_.]

BERGAMOT, b[.e]r'ga-mot, _n._ a group of varieties of pear of fine flavour.
[Fr.--It.--Turk. _begarm[=u]di_.]

BERGMEHL, b[.e]rg'm[=a]l, _n._ a deposit of diatomaceous white earth or
powder, that used in Norway to be mixed with flour and used as food. [Ger.
'mountain-flour.']

BERIBERI, ber'i-ber-i, _n._ an Eastern disease marked by anæmia, paralysis,
and dropsical symptoms. [Singh.]

BERKELEIANISM, berk'l[=e]-an-izm, _n._ the philosophy of Bishop _Berkeley_
(1685-1753), who maintained that the world we see and touch is not an
abstract independent substance, of which conscious mind may be an effect,
but is the very world which is presented to our senses, and which depends
for its actuality on being perceived.--_adj._ and _n._ BERKELEI'AN.

BERLIN, b[.e]r'lin, _n._ an old-fashioned four-wheeled covered carriage,
with a seat behind covered with a hood--also BER'LINE.--BERLIN BLUE,
Prussian blue; BERLIN WOOL, a fine dyed wool for worsted-work, knitting,
&c.

BERM, b[.e]rm, _n._ a ledge: esp. a fortification. [Fr. _berme_; Ger.
_berme_.]

BERNARDINE, b[.e]r'nard-in, _adj._ Cistercian. [From St _Bernard_ of
Clairvaux, founder of the order.]

BEROB, be-rob', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to rob or plunder.

BERRY, ber'i, _n._ a popular term for any small succulent fruit, but
restricted in botanical language to simple fruits with pericarp succulent
throughout, whether developed from superior (grape, potato, bitternut,
belladonna, bryony, asparagus, tomato), or more commonly inferior ovary
(gooseberry, currant, barberry, bilberry, &c.)--thus, strictly, the
strawberry, raspberry, blackberry, are not berries.--_v.i._ to come into
berry, to swell.--_adj._ BER'RIED, bearing berries. [A.S. _berie_.]

BERSAGLIERI, b[=a]r-sal-y[=a]'r[=e], _n.pl._ the riflemen or sharpshooters
of the Italian army, first organised in the Sardinian army in 1836. [It.;
pl. of _bersagliere_, _bersaglio_, a mark.]

BERSERK, -ER, b[.e]r'serk, -[.e]r, _n._ a Norse warrior whom the sight of
the field of battle would fill with a frenzied and resistless fury--'the
berserker rage.' [Ice. _berserkr_; Vigfusson explains the word as
'bear-sark,' and most probably a reference to the uncanny Werewolf
superstition is involved.]

BERTH, b[.e]rth, _n._ a ship's station at anchor; a room or sleeping-place
in a ship, a sleeping-carriage, &c.: any allotted or assigned place: a
situation or place of employment, usually a comfortable one--even without
such a qualifying adjective as 'a snug berth.'--_v.t._ to moor a ship: to
furnish with a berth.--TO GIVE A WIDE BERTH TO, to keep well away from
generally. [A doublet of BIRTH; from BEAR.]

BERYL, b[.e]r'il, _n._ a precious stone resembling the emerald, but
colourless, yellowish, greenish yellow or blue--its finer varieties are
called precious beryl, and sometimes aquamarine. It has important uses as a
magic crystal in which the future becomes visible.--_adj._ beryl-like in
colour. [O. Fr. _beryl_--L. _beryllus_--Gr. _b[=e]ryllos_.]

BESAINT, be-s[=a]nt', _v.t._ to make a saint of.--_pa.p._ BESAINT'ED,
canonised: haunted with saints.

BESCATTER, be-skat'[.e]r, _v.t._ to scatter over.

BESCRAWL, be-skrawl', _v.t._ to scrawl or scribble over.

BESCREEN, be-skr[=e]n', _v.t._ to screen: to overshadow.

BESCRIBBLE, be-skrib'l, _v.t._ to write in a scribbling hand: to scribble
about or upon.

BESEECH, be-s[=e]ch', _v.t._ to entreat, to implore (as a person, _for_ a
thing, or _to do_ a thing): to ask or pray earnestly: to
solicit--(_Spens._) BESEEKE':--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ besought'.--_ns._
BESEECH'ER; BESEECH'ING.--_adv._ BESEECH'INGLY.--_ns._ BESEECH'INGNESS;
BESEECH'MENT. [Pfx. _be-_, and M. E. _sechen_, to SEEK.]

BESEEM, be-s[=e]m', _v.t._ to be seemly or fit for: to become: to be fit
for or worthy of: (_Spens._) to become or appear.--_ns._ BESEEM'ING,
BESEEM'INGNESS--_adv._ BESEEM'INGLY.

BESEEN, be-s[=e]n', _pa.p._ of good appearance, comely: well furnished
(with _well_).--BESEE' is quite obsolete.

BESET, be-set', _v.t._ to surround or set round with anything (now only in
_pa.p._): to surround with hostile intentions, to besiege: to occupy so as
to allow none to go out or in: to assail, perplex, endanger, as by
temptations, obstacles, &c.:--_pr.p._ beset'ting; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._
beset'.--_ns._ BESET'MENT; BESET'TER.--_p.adj._ BESET'TING, that besets, as
in 'besetting sin.'

BESHADOW, be-shad'[=o], _v.t._ to cast a shadow over.

BESHAME, be-sh[=a]m', _v.t._ to put to shame.

BESHINE, be-sh[=i]n', _v.i._ to light up.--_p.adj._ BESHONE'.

BESHREW, be-shr[=oo]', _v.t._ to invoke evil upon, to curse--now only in
such mild imprecations as 'beshrew me,' or 'thee'--prob. not imperative but
elliptical, like '(I) thank you.' [Pfx. _be-_, and SHREW.]

BESIDE, be-s[=i]d', _prep._ and _adv._ by the side of, near: over and above
(in this sense, now usually BESIDES'), distinct from: apart from, not
falling within, as of a question, resolution, &c.--BESIDE THE MARK, away
from the mark aimed at, irrelevant.--TO BE BESIDE ONE'S SELF, to be out of
one's senses. [M. E. _bi siden_--A.S. _be si'dan_, by the side (dat.).]

BESIDES, be-s[=i]dz', _prep._ and _adv._ in addition, otherwise, aside:
over and above, in addition to, away from. [BESIDE, with the _s_ of the
_adv._ gen.]

BESIEGE, be-s[=e]j', _v.t._ to lay siege to: to beset with armed forces: to
throng round.--_n._ BESIEG'ER.--_adv._ BESIEG'INGLY (_rare_), urgently.

BESIGH, be-s[=i]', _v.t._ to sigh over.

BESING, be-sing', _v.t._ to celebrate in song.--_p.adj._ BESUNG'.

BESIT, be-sit', _v.t._ (_obs._) to besiege: to sit well on, as clothes, to
become.--_p.adj._ BESIT'TING (_Spens._), becoming.

BESLAVE, be-sl[=a]v', _v.t._ to make a slave of: to call slave.

BESLAVER, be-sl[=a]v'[.e]r, _v.t._ to slaver or slobber upon: to cover with
fulsome flattery.

BESLOBBER, be-slob'[.e]r, _v.t._ to besmear with the spittle running from
one's mouth: to cover with drivelling kisses: to flatter fulsomely.--_v.t._
BESLUB'BER, to bedaub or besmear.

BESMEAR, be-sm[=e]r', _v.t._ to smear over: to bedaub: to pollute.

BESMIRCH, be-smirch', _v.t._ to soil, as with smoke or soot: to
sully.--_v.t._ BESMUTCH', to besmirch.

BESMUT, be-smut', _v.t._ to blacken with soot.--_p.adj._ BESMUT'TED.

BESOGNO, BESONIO. Same as BEZONIAN.

BESOM, b[=e]'zum, _n._ an implement for sweeping, a broom: any cleansing or
purifying agent: (_Scot._) a term of reproach for a woman.--_ns._
B[=E]'SOM-HEAD, a blockhead; B[=E]'SOM-RID'ER, a witch.--TO JUMP THE BESOM
(see BROOM). [A.S. _besema_, _besma_; a common Teut. word; Ger. _besen_,
Dut. _bezem_.]

BESORT, be-sort', _v.t._ (_obs._, _Shak._) to match with, befit,
become.--_n._ suitable company.

BESOT, be-sot', _v.t._ to make sottish, dull, or stupid: to make a sot of:
to cause to dote on: to infatuate (_with_):--_pr.p._ besot'ting; _pa.p._
besot'ted.--_p.adj._ BESOT'TED, infatuated.--_adv._ BESOT'TEDLY.--_n._
BESOT'TEDNESS.

BESOUGHT, be-sawt', _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BESEECH.

BESOULED, be-s[=o]ld', _adj._ endowed with a soul.

BESPANGLE, be-spang'gl, _v.t._ to adorn with spangles, or with anything
sparkling or shining.

BESPATE, be-sp[=a]t', _p.adj._ spit upon.

BESPATTER, be-spat'[.e]r, _v.t._ to spatter or sprinkle with dirt or
anything moist: to defame.

BESPEAK, be-sp[=e]k', _v.t._ to speak for or engage beforehand: to
stipulate or ask for: to betoken.--_v.i._ (_obs._) to speak:--_pa.t._
besp[=o]ke'; _pa.p._ besp[=o]ke' and besp[=o]k'en.--_n._ an actor's
benefit, so called because the actor's friends and patrons bespeak or
choose the piece to be performed that night.

BESPECKLE, be-spek'l, _v.t._ to mark with speckles or spots.

BESPECTACLED, be-spek'ta-kld, _pa.p._ having spectacles on.

BESPEED, be-sp[=e]d', _v.t._ to help on.--_p.adj._ BESPED'.

BESPICE, be-sp[=i]s', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to season with spice: to drug or
poison.

BESPOKE, be-sp[=o]k', BESPOKEN, be-sp[=o]k'n, _pa.p._ of BESPEAK, ordered,
as boots, clothes, &c.

BESPOT, be-spot', _v.t._ to cover with spots.--_p.adj._ BESPOT'TED.--_n._
BESPOT'TEDNESS.

BESPOUT, be-spowt', _v.t._ to spout over: to declaim pompously.

BESPREAD, be-spred', _v.t._ to spread over: to cover:--_pr.p._
bespread'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bespread'.

BESPRENT, be-sprent', _pa.p._ sprinkled over: scattered. [A.S.
_besprengan_. See SPRINKLE.]

BESPRINKLE, be-spring'kl, _v.t._ to sprinkle over.

BESSEMER, bes'[.e]m-[.e]r, _adj._ derived from the name of the inventor,
Sir H. _Bessemer_, applied to steel for rails, tires, ship-plates, &c.,
prepared by the Bessemer process.

BEST, best, _adj._ (serves as _superl._ of GOOD) good in the highest
degree: first: highest: most excellent.--_n._ one's utmost endeavour: the
highest perfection.--_adv._ (_superl._ of WELL) in the highest degree: in
the best manner.--_v.t._ (_coll._) to get the better of.--BEST MAN and BEST
MAID, the groomsman and bridesmaid at a wedding.--AT THE BEST, or AT BEST,
in the best possible way, at most after every allowance is made; FOR THE
BEST, with the best intentions; I WERE BEST = it were best _for me_.--TO
HAVE THE BEST OF IT, to gain the advantage in a contest; TO MAKE THE BEST
OF ONE'S WAY, to go by the best possible road; TO PUT ONE'S BEST FOOT
FOREMOST, to do the best, or to make the best show, one can. [A.S. _betst_,
_betest_. See BETTER.]

BESTAIN, be-st[=a]n', _v.t._ to stain all over.

BESTEAD, be-sted', _v.t._ to help, relieve: to be of use to, to
avail.--_v.i._ to profit, be advantageous.

BESTEAD, BESTED, be-sted', _p.adj._ set about (_with_): beset (with _by_,
of foes; _with_, of dangers, &c.): situated--usually with _ill_, _hard_,
&c.

BESTIAL, best'i-al, _adj._ like a beast: rude: brutally sensual.--_n._
(_Scot._) a collective name for cattle.--_v.t._ BEST'IALISE, to make like a
beast.--_ns._ BEST'IALISM, irrationality; BESTIAL'ITY, beastliness:
disgusting vice. [L. _bestialis_. See BEAST.]

BESTIARY, best'i-ar-i, _n._ the name given to a class of books of great
popularity in the Middle Ages, describing all the animals of creation, real
or fabled, generally illustrated by drawings, and allegorised for
edification. [Low L. _bestiarium_, a menagerie.]

BESTICK, be-stik', _v.t._ to stick over, as with sharp points.

BESTILL, be-stil', _v.t._ to make quiet, to hush.

BESTIR, be-st[.e]r', _v.t._ to put into lively action: arouse into
activity: (_refl._) to rouse one's self--_p.adj._ BESTIR'RING.

BESTORM, be-storm', _v.t._ to assail with storms or tumult.

BESTOW, be-st[=o]', _v.t._ to stow, place, or put by: to give or confer: to
accommodate with quarters: to apply (with _on_ and _upon_): (_refl._,
_Shak._) to acquit one's self.--_ns._ BESTOW'AL, act of bestowing:
disposal; BESTOW'ER; BESTOW'MENT.

BESTRADDLE, be-strad'dl, _v.t._ to bestride.

BESTRAUGHT, be-strawt', _adj._ (_obs._) distraught: distracted: mad.
[Formed with pfx. _be-_, on the analogy of _distraught_--L. _dis-tractus_.]

BESTREAK, be-str[=e]k', _v.t._ to overspread with streaks.

BESTREW, be-str[=oo]', _v.t._ to strew or scatter loosely over:--_pa.p._
bestrewed', bestr[=o]wn', bestrewn' (_with_).

BESTRIDE, be-str[=i]d', _v.t._ to stride over: to sit or stand across: to
defend, protect, from the sense of standing over a fallen man to defend
him:--_pa.t._ bestrid', bestr[=o]de'; _pa.p._ bestrid', bestrid'den.

BESTUCK, be-stuk', _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BESTICK, to stick about, adorn:
to transfix.

BESTUD, be-stud', _v.t._ to adorn as with studs, as the sky with stars.

BET, bet, _n._ a wager: something staked to be lost or won on the result of
a doubtful issue, as a horse-race, or the like.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to lay
or stake, as a bet:--_pr.p._ bet'ting; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bet or
bet'ted.--_ns._ BET'TER, one who bets--also BET'TOR; BET'TING, act of
betting or proposing a wager.--AN EVEN BET, an equal chance.--YOU BET, in
American slang, certainly. [Prob. shortened from the noun ABET.]

BETAKE, be-t[=a]k', _v.t._ to take one's self to, to go (with _self_): to
apply or have recourse:--_pa.t._ betook'; _pa.p._ bet[=a]k'en.

BETEEM, be-t[=e]m', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to grant, to suffer, to allow. [Most
prob. from pfx. _be-_, and TEEM.]

BETEL, b[=e]'tl, _n._ the betel-nut, or nut of the areca palm, with lime
and the leaves of the Betel-Pepper, chewed by the Malays as a stimulant.
[Through Port. from Malay _vettila_.]

BETHANKIT, be-thank'it, Scotch for 'God be thanked.'

BETHEL, beth'el, _n._ a hallowed spot, a name applied by some Methodists to
their places of worship: an old ship fitted up in a port as a place of
worship for sailors. [Heb. _B[=e]th-[=e]l_, house of God.]

BETHINK, be-thingk', _v.t._ to think on or call to mind: to recollect
(generally followed by a reflective pronoun and _of_): to propose to one's
self.--_v.i._ to consider:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bethought (be-thawt').
[A.S. _bithencan_; cf. Ger. _bedenken_. See THINK.]

BETHRALL, be-thrawl', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to enslave.

BETHUMB, be-thum', _v.t._ to mark with the thumbs:--_pa.p._ bethumbed'.

BETHUMP, be-thump', _v.t._ to thump or beat soundly.

BETHWACK, be-thwak', _v.t._ to thrash soundly.

BETIDE, be-t[=i]d', _v.i._ to happen to, to befall--in third person, and
often impersonally, with dative object, now little used save in phrase,
'woe betide!': (_rare_) to betoken:--_pa.p._ (_Shak._) BETID'. [See TIDE.]

BETIME, be-t[=i]m', _v.i._ (_Shak._) to betide.

BETIMES, be-t[=i]mz', _adv._ in good time: early: seasonably: speedily.
[Pfx. _be-_, and TIME, with _adv._ gen. _-s_; like _besides_ from beside.]

BETITLE, be-t[=i]'tl, _v.t._ to give a name to.

BETOIL, be-toil', _v.t._ to weary with toil.

BETOKEN, be-t[=o]'kn, _v.t._ to show by a sign: to foreshow. [See TOKEN.]

BETONY, bet'on-i, _n._ a common British labiate plant growing in woods, of
great repute in ancient and medieval medicine, used to dye wool yellow.
[Fr.--L. _betonica_, _vettonica_.]

BETOOK, be-took', _pa.t._ of BETAKE.

BETOSSED, be-tost', _pa.p._ (_Shak._) agitated.

BETRAY, be-tr[=a]', _v.t._ to give up treacherously: to disclose in breach
of trust: to let go basely or weakly: to deceive the innocent and trustful,
to seduce: to discover or show: to show signs of.--_ns._ BETRAY'AL, act of
betraying; BETRAY'ER, a traitor, the seducer of a trustful girl. [Pfx.
_be-_, and O. Fr. _traïr_ (Fr. _trahir_)--L. _trad[)e]re_, to deliver up.]

BETRIM, be-trim', _v.t._ to trim or set in order, to deck, to dress.

BETRODDEN, be-trod'n, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BETREAD', to tread over or
walk upon.

BETROTH, be-troth', _v.t._ to contract or promise in order to marriage: to
affiance: (_obs._) to pledge one's self to any cause.--_ns._ BETROTH'AL,
BETROTH'MENT, an agreement or contract with a view to marriage. [Pfx.
_be-_, and TROTH or TRUTH.]

BETTER, bet'[.e]r, _adj._ (serves as _comp._ of GOOD) good in a greater
degree: preferable: improved: more suitable: larger: kinder: stronger in
health.--_adv._ (_comp._ of WELL) well in a greater degree: more fully or
completely: over or more than: with greater advantage: (_pl._)
superiors.--_v.t._ to make better (also reflexively, to better one's self),
to improve: to benefit: also with intransitive sense, to grow
better.--_p.adjs._ BET'TERED, improved, amended; BET'TERING,
improving.--_ns._ BET'TERING, BET'TERMENT, BET'TERNESS.--_adj._
BET'TERMOST.--BETTER HALF, a jocose term for a wife, once applied seriously
to either wife or husband, and even the soul as opposed to the body.--I HAD
BETTER = I should hold it better to--the original construction having been
a dative pronoun.--TO BE BETTER OFF, to be in superior circumstances; TO BE
BETTER THAN ONE'S SELF, to do more than one had promised; TO GET THE BETTER
OF, to gain the advantage over. [A.S. _bet_ (adv.), _betera_, better; Goth.
_batiza_, Ger. _besser_. Prob. cog. with BOOT.]

BETTY, bet'ti, _n._ a man who troubles himself with the women's work in a
household: a _slang_ name for a burglar's jemmy or _jenny_. [_Betty_,
_Bet_, familiar abbrev. of _Elizabeth_.]

BETUMBLED, be-tum'bld, _adj._ (_Shak._) tumbled or disordered.

BETUTOR, be-t[=u]'tor, _v.t._ to tutor or instruct.

BETWEEN, be-tw[=e]n', BETWIXT, be-twikst', _prep._ in the middle of two, of
space, time, or degree: in the middle or intermediate space, to defend or
separate: expressing reciprocal relation from one to another: by the joint
action of two or more persons.--_ns._ BETWEEN'-DECKS, the space between any
two decks of a ship; BETWEEN'ITY (_rare_), state of being between.--_prep._
BETWEEN'-WHILES, at intervals.--BETWEEN OURSELVES, in confidence; BETWIXT
AND BETWEEN, in a middling position.--TO GO BETWEEN, to act as a mediator.
[A.S. _betwéonum_ _betweónan_--_be_, and _twegen_, _twa_, two, twain.]

[Illustration]

BEVEL, bev'el, _n._ a slant or inclination of a surface: an instrument
opening like a pair of compasses, and adjustable for measuring
angles.--_adj._ having the form of a bevel: slanting.--_v.t._ to form with
a bevel or slant:--_pr.p._ bev'elling; _pa.p._ bev'elled.--_ns._
BEV'EL-GEAR, BEV'EL-WHEELS (_mech._), wheels working on each other in
different planes, the cogs of the wheels being bevelled or at oblique
angles to the shafts.--_p.adj._ BEV'ELLED, cut to an oblique angle, sloped
off. [Fr. _biveau_, an instrument for measuring angles; orig. unknown.]

BEVER, an obsolete form of BEAVER.

BEVERAGE, bev'[.e]r-[=a]j, _n._ drink: a mixture of cider and water: any
agreeable liquor for drinking.--_n._ BE'VER, a small repast between meals:
(_obs._) a time for drinking.--_v.i._ to take such a repast. [O. Fr.
_bevrage_ (Fr. _breuvage_), _beivre_--L. _bibere_, to drink.]

BEVY, bev'i, _n._ a brood or flock of birds, esp. of quails: a company,
esp. of ladies. [M. E. _bevey_, prob. the same as O. Fr. _bevee_, _buvee_,
drink, It. _bevuta_, a draught; the transference of sense being perh. from
a drink or a drinking-bout to a drinking-party.]

BEWAIL, be-w[=a]l', _v.t._ to lament: to mourn loudly over (esp. the
dead).--_v.i._ to utter lamentations.--_adjs._ BEWAIL'ABLE, BEWAIL'ING.
[See WAIL.]

BEWARE, be-w[=a]r', _v.i._ to be on one's guard: to be suspicious of
danger: to take care (with _of_; with clause--_lest_, _that_, _not_,
_how_). [From the words _be_ and _ware_ run together. See WARY.]

BEWEEP, be-w[=e]p', _v.t._ to weep over, to lament.--_p.adj._ BEWEPT',
disfigured by weeping.

BEWELTERED, be-wel't[.e]rd, _p.adj._ besmeared by weltering in blood. [Pfx.
_be-_, and WELTER.]

BEWET, be-wet', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to wet or moisten.

BEWIG, be-wig', to cover with a wig.--_p.adj._ BEWIGGED'.

BEWILDER, be-wil'd[.e]r, _v.t._ to perplex or lead astray.--_p.adj._
BEWIL'DERED, lost, confused in mind, trackless.--_adj._
BEWIL'DERING.--_adv._ BEWIL'DERINGLY.--_n._ BEWIL'DERMENT, confusion,
mental confusion: perplexity. [Pfx. _be-_, and prov. Eng. _wildern_, a
wilderness.]

BEWITCH, be-wich', _v.t._ to affect by witchcraft (mostly malignantly): to
fascinate or charm.--_ns._ BEWITCH'ERY, BEWITCH'MENT.--_adj._ BEWITCH'ING,
charming, enchanting.--_adv._ BEWITCH'INGLY.

BEWRAY, be-r[=a]', _v.t._ (_B._) to accuse: to point out: to betray or
divulge unintentionally. [M. E. _bewreien_, _be-_, and A.S. _wrégan_, to
accuse.]

BEY, b[=a], _n._ a Turkish governor of a town or province. [Turk. _beg_,
pronounced _b[=a]_, a governor.]

BEYOND, be-yond', _prep._ on the farther side of: farther onward than: out
of reach of: past in time: above, superior to.--BEYOND MEASURE,
excessively; BEYOND SEAS, abroad; THE BACK OF BEYOND (_De Quincey_, &c.), a
humorous phrase for any place a great way off; TO BE BEYOND ONE, to pass
his comprehension; TO GO BEYOND, to surpass: to circumvent: (_B._, _Shak._)
to overreach. [A.S. _begeondan_--pfx. _be-_, and _geond_, across, beyond.
See YON.]

BEZANT, be-zant', or bez'ant, _n._ a gold coin, first struck at _Byzantium_
or Constantinople: (_her._) a small circle or, like a gold coin.

BEZEL, bez'l, _n._ the part of the setting of a precious stone which
encloses it: the oblique side or face of a cut gem: the grooved flange or
rim in which a watch-glass is set: the slope at the edge of a chisel or
plane (usually BAS'IL). [From an O. Fr. word represented by mod. Fr.
_biseau_; its ult. origin uncertain.]

BEZIQUE, be-z[=e]k', _n._ a game at cards for two, three, or four persons,
played with two to four packs, from which cards with from two to six pips
have been removed. The name _Bezique_ itself is applied to the combination
of the knave of diamonds and queen of spades. [Fr. _besigue_, of obscure
origin.]

BEZOAR, b[=e]'z[=o]r, _n._ a stony concretion found in the stomachs of
goats, antelopes, llamas, chamois, &c., formerly esteemed an antidote to
all poisons. [Through Sp. _bezaar_ and Ar. _b[=a]zahr_, from Pers.
_p[=a]d-zahr_, counter-poison, _zahr_, poison.]

BEZONIAN, be-z[=o]'ni-an, _n._ (_Shak._) a beggar, a low fellow. [It.
_bisogno_; Sp. _bisoño_, Fr. _bisogne_.]

BEZZLE, bez'l, _v.i._ (_obs._) to drink hard: to squander:--_pr.p._
bezz'ling; _pa.p._ bezz'led. [O. Fr. _besiler_. See EMBEZZLE.]

BHANG, bang, _n._ the native name for the Indian preparation of hemp which
is smoked or swallowed for its narcotic and intoxicating qualities--in
Arabic known as _hashish_. [See ASSASSIN. Hind. _bh[=a]ng_; Pers. _bang_;
Sans. _bhang[=a]_.]

BIAS, b[=i]'as, _n._ a bulge or greater weight on one side of a bowl (in
the game of bowling), making it slope or turn to one side: a slant or
leaning to one side: a one-sided inclination of the mind, prejudice: any
special influence that sways the mind.--_v.t._ to cause to turn to one
side: to prejudice or prepossess:--_pa.p._ b[=i]'ased or
b[=i]'assed.--_ns._ B[=I]'AS-DRAW'ING (_Shak._), a turn awry; B[=I]'ASING,
a bias or inclination to one side. [Fr. _biais_, of dubious origin; Diez
suggests L. _bifax_, _bifacem_, two-faced.]

BIAXAL, b[=i]-aks'al, _adj._ having two optic axes.--Also BIAXIAL. [L.
_bi-_, and AXIAL.]

BIB, bib, _n._ a cloth put under an infant's chin: a similar article of
dress for adults, worn over the breast or above the apron.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ to drink, to tipple.--_adj._ B[=I]B[=A]'CIOUS.--_ns._ BIB[=A]'TION,
tippling; BIB'BER, a tippler: chiefly used in composition as (_B._)
wine-bibber. [M. E. _bibben_, most prob. from L. _bib-[)e]re_, to drink.]

BIB, bib, _n._ a fish of the same genus as the cod and haddock, also called
the _Pout_.

BIBBLE-BABBLE, bib'bl-bab'bl, _n._ (_Shak._) idle talk. [Reduplication of
BABBLE.]

BIBLE, b[=i]'bl, _n._ the sacred writings of the Christian Church,
consisting of the Old and New Testaments.--_adj._ BIB'LICAL, of or relating
to the Bible: scriptural.--_adv._ BIB'LICALLY.--_ns._ BIB'LICISM, biblical
doctrine, learning, or literature; BIB'LICIST, B[=I]B'LIST, one versed in
biblical learning: one who makes Scripture the sole rule of faith.
[Fr.--Low L. _biblia_, fem. sing., earlier neut. pl., from Gr. _ta biblia_,
lit. 'the books,' esp. the canonical books of Scripture, _biblion_, a book,
dim. of _biblos_, papyrus, paper.]

BIBLIOGRAPHY, bib-li-og'raf-i, _n._ the description or knowledge of books,
in regard to their authors, subjects, editions, and history.--_n._
BIBLIOG'RAPHER, one versed in bibliography or the history of books.--_adj._
BIBLIOGRAPH'IC. [Gr. _biblion_, a book, _graphia_, description.]

BIBLIOLATRY, bib-li-ol'at-ri, _n._ superstitious reverence for the
Bible.--_ns._ BIBLIOL'ATRIST, BIBLIOL'ATER, one given to bibliolatry. [Gr.
_biblion_, a book, _latreia_, worship.]

BIBLIOLOGY, bib-li-ol'[=o]-ji, _n._ an account of books: biblical
literature, or theology. [Gr. _biblion_, a book, _logos_, discourse.]

BIBLIOMANCY, bib'li-[=o]-man-si, _n._ divination by selecting passages of
the Bible at hazard, and drawing from them indications concerning future
events. [Gr. _biblion_, a book, _manteia_, divination.]

BIBLIOMANIA, bib-li-[=o]-m[=a]n'i-a, _n._ a mania for possessing _rare_ and
curious books.--_n._ BIBLIOM[=A]N'IAC, one who has a mania for possessing
_rare_ and curious books.--_adj._ BIBLIOMAN[=I]'ACAL. [Gr. _biblion_, a
book, and MANIA.]

BIBLIOPHILE, bib'li-[=o]-f[=i]l, _n._ a lover of books, esp. a collector of
_rare_ books. [Fr.--Gr. _biblion_, a book, _philos_, friend.]

BIBLIOPOLE, bib'li-[=o]-p[=o]l, _n._ a bookseller.--Also BIBLIOP'OLIST.
[Gr. _biblion_, a book, _p[=o]leein_, to sell.]

BIBULOUS, bib'[=u]-lus, _adj._ drinking or sucking in: spongy. [L.
_bibulus_--_bib-[)e]re_, to drink.]

BICAMERAL, b[=i]-kam'[.e]r-al, _adj._ having two chambers. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and _camera_, chamber.]

BICARBONATE, b[=i]-kär'bon-[=a]t, _n._ a carbonate or salt having two
equivalents of carbonic acid to one equivalent of base. [L. _bi-_, twice,
and CARBONATE.]

BICE, b[=i]s, _n._ a pale blue or green paint. [Fr. _bis_.]

BICENTENARY, b[=i]-sen'te-na-ri, BICENTENNIAL, b[=i]-sen-ten'ni-al, _adj._
pertaining to the two hundredth.--_n._ the two hundredth anniversary.

BICEPHALOUS, b[=i]-sef'al-us, _adj._ double-headed. [L. _bis_, twice, and
Gr. _k[=e]phal[=e]_, head.]

BICEPS, b[=i]'seps, _n._ the muscle in front of the arm between the
shoulder and elbow. [L. _biceps_, two-headed--_bis_, twice, and _caput_,
head.]

BICHROMATE, b[=i]-kr[=o]'m[=a]t, _adj._ having two parts of chromic acid to
one of other ingredients. [L. _bis_, twice, and CHROMATE.]

BICIPITAL, b[=i]-sip'it-al, _adj._ (_anat._) having two heads or
origins.--Earlier form BICIP'ITOUS.

BICKER, bik'[.e]r, _v.i._ to contend in a petty way: to quiver: to move
quickly and tremulously, as running water.--_n._ a fight, a quarrel: a
clattering noise: a short run.--_n._ BICK'ERMENT (_Spens._), bickering,
strife. [Acc. to Skeat, _bicker_ = _pick-er_, or _peck-er_, to _peck_
repeatedly with the _beak_.]

BICKER, bik'[.e]r, _n._ a bowl for holding liquor, esp. of wood: a vessel
made of wooden staves for holding porridge. [Scot. form of BEAKER.]

BICONCAVE, b[=i]-kon'k[=a]v, _adj._ concave on both sides. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and CONCAVE.]

BICONVEX, b[=i]-kon'veks, _adj._ convex on both sides. [L. _bi-_, twice,
and CONVEX.]

BICORPORATE, b[=i]-kor'por-[=a]t, _adj._ (_her._) double-bodied, as the
head of a lion to which two bodies are attached. [L. _bis_, twice, and
CORPORATE.]

BICUSPID, b[=i]-kus'pid, _adj._ having two cusps: a pre-molar tooth. [L.
_bi-_, twice, and CUSP.]

BICYCLE, b[=i]'si-kl, _n._ a cycle or velocipede with two wheels furnished
with rubber tires, arranged one before the other, impelled by pedals, and
steered by transverse handles affixed to the front wheel--also BIKE
(_colloq._).--_n._ B[=I]'CYCLIST. [Formed from L. _bi-_, _bis_, twice, and
Gr. _kyklos_, a circle.]

BID, bid, _v.t._ to offer: to propose: to proclaim, as the banns of
marriage: to invite: to command: to make an offer, and to increase the
amount offered for a thing--at an auction:--_pr.p._ bid'ding; _pa.t._ bid
or bade; _pa.p._ bid, bid'den.--_n._ an offer of a price.--_ns._ BID'DER,
one who bids or offers a price; BID'DING, offer: invitation: command;
BID'DING-PRAY'ER, a form of prayer directed to be used before all sermons,
lectures, and homilies preached apart from the daily service or holy
communion--as university sermons, so called because in it the preacher is
directed to bid or exhort the people to pray for certain specified
objects.--TO BID FAIR, to seem likely. [A.S. _béodan_; Goth. _biudan_, Ger.
_bieten_, to offer.]

BID, bid, _v.t._ to ask for: (nearly _obs._): to pray. [A.S. _biddan_;
Goth. _bidjan_; Ger. _bitten_; the connection with BID, to command, is dub.
See BEAD.]

BIDE, b[=i]d, _v.t._ and _v.i._ same as ABIDE, to wait for.--_n._ BID'ING
(_Shak._), residence, habitation. [A.S. _bídan_; Goth. _beidan_.]

BIDENTATE, b[=i]-dent'[=a]t, _adj._ having two teeth.--Also BIDENT'AL. [L.
_bi-_; twice, _dens_, _dentis_, a tooth.]

BIELD, b[=e]ld, _n._ (_Wordsworth_) shelter: protection. [Scot.; conn. with
BOLD.]

BIENNIAL, b[=i]-en'yal, _adj._ lasting two years: happening once in two
years.--_n._ a plant that lasts two years.--_adv._ BIENN'IALLY. [L.
_biennalis_--_bi-_, twice, and _annus_, a year.]

BIER, b[=e]r, _n._ a carriage or frame of wood for bearing the dead to the
grave. [A.S. _b['æ]r_; Ger. _bahre_, L. _fer-etrum_. From root of verb
BEAR.]

BIESTINGS. Same as BEESTINGS.

BIFACIAL, b[=i]-f[=a]'shyal, _adj._ having two like faces or opposite
surfaces. [L. _bi-_, twice, and FACIAL.]

BIFFINS, bif'inz, _n._ apples slowly dried in bakers' ovens and flattened
into cakes--prepared in great quantities in Norfolk. [Said to be properly
_beefins_, because like raw beef.]

BIFIDATE, bif'id-[=a]t, _adj._ (_bot._) cleft in two.--Also BIF'ID. [L.
_bifidus_--_bi-_, _bis_, twice, and _find[)e]re_, perf. _fidi_, to cleave
or split.]

BIFLORATE, b[=i]-fl[=o]'r[=a]t, _adj._ bearing two flowers. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and _flos_, _floris_, a flower.]

BIFOLD, b[=i]'f[=o]ld, _adj._ twofold: (_Shak._) of two kinds. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and FOLD.]

BIFOLIATE, b[=i]-f[=o]'li-[=a]t, _adj._ having two leaves. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and FOLIATE.]

BIFORM, b[=i]'form, _adj._ having two forms. [L. _bi-_, twice, and FORM.]

BIFURCATE, b[=i]-fur'k[=a]t, BIFURCATED, b[=i]-fur'k[=a]t-ed, _adj._
two-forked; having two prongs or branches.--_n._ BIFURC[=A]'TION, a forking
or division into two branches. [L. _bifurcus_--_bi-_, _bis_, twice,
_furca_, a fork.]

BIG, big, _adj._ large or great: pregnant: great in air, mien, or spirit:
loud: pompous, esp. 'to talk big,' 'look big.'--_adjs._ BIG-BELL'IED,
having a big belly; pregnant (_with_); BIG'GISH, rather big.--_ns._
BIG'NESS, bulk, size; BIG'WIG (_colloq._), a leading man, a person of some
importance. [M. E. _big_; origin very obscure--Skeat suggests that it is
_bilg_, the _l_ being dropped, and compares Ice. _belgja_, to puff out.]

BIG, big, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to build, to pile up.--_n._ BIG'GIN, anything
built, a house. [Sc. _byggja_; A.S. _búian_.]

BIGAMY, big'am-i, _n._ the crime of having two wives or two husbands at
once.--_n._ BIG'AMIST, one who has committed bigamy. [Fr.--L. _bi-_, _bis_,
twice, and Gr. _gamos_, marriage.]

BIGG, big, _n._ a kind of barley. [Scand.; Ice. _bygg_, Dan. _byg_.]

BIGGIN, big'in, _n._ a child's cap or hood. [Fr. _béguin_, from the cap
worn by the _Beguines_, a religious society of women in France.]

BIGHT, b[=i]t, _n._ a bend of the shore, or small bay: a bend or coil of a
rope. [A.S. _byht_; cf. Dan. and Sw. _bugt_, Dut. _bocht_; from _b[=u]gan_,
to bow.]

BIGNONIA, big-n[=o]'ni-a, _n._ a genus of tropical plants with
trumpet-shaped flowers, named from the Abbé _Bignon_, Louis XIV.'s
librarian.

BIGOT, big'ot, _n._ one blindly and obstinately devoted to a particular
creed or party.--_adj._ BIG'OTED, having the qualities of a bigot.--_n._
BIG'OTRY, blind or excessive zeal, esp. in religious matters. [O. Fr.; of
dub. origin; variously conn. with _Visigoth_, they being Arians, while the
Franks were orthodox; with Sp. _bigote_, a moustache; with _Beguine_
(q.v.); and by Wace with a worthless legend that the Norman Rollo, in
refusing to kiss the foot of Charles the Simple, said, 'Ne se, _bi got_.']

BIJOU, be-zh[=oo]', _n._ a trinket: a jewel: a little box:--_pl._ BIJOUX
(be-zh[=oo]').--_n._ BIJOU'TRY, jewellery: small articles of virtu. [Fr.]

BIKE, b[=i]k, _n._ a nest of wasps, wild bees, &c.: a swarm of people.
[Scot.; ety. dub.]

BIKE. See BICYCLE.

BILABIATE, b[=i]-l[=a]'bi-[=a]t, _adj._ having two lips, as some corollas.
[L. _bi-_, twice, and LABIATE.]

BILANDER, b[=i]'land-[.e]r, _n._ a two-masted hoy, having her mainsail bent
to the whole length of her yard, hanging fore and aft, and inclined to the
horizontal at an angle of about 45º.--Also BY'LANDER. [Dut. _bijlander_.]

BILATERAL, b[=i]-lat'[.e]r-al, _adj._ having two sides.--_adv._
BILAT'ERALLY. [L. _bi-_, twice, and LATERAL.]

BILBERRY, bil'ber-i, _n._ called also _Whortleberry_, a shrub and its
berries, which are dark blue. [Cf. Dan. _böllebær_; Scot. _blaeberry_; Ger.
_blaubeere_.]

BILBO, bil'b[=o], _n._ a rapier or sword:--_pl._ BILBOES (bil'b[=o]z),
fetters. [From _Bilbao_, in Spain.]

BILE, b[=i]l, _n._ a thick bitter fluid secreted by the liver--yellow in
man and carnivorous animals, green in vegetable feeders: (_fig._)
ill-humour.--_n._ BILE'-DUCT, the duct which conveys the bile from the
liver and the gall-bladder to the small intestine.--_adjs._ BIL'IARY,
belonging to or conveying bile; BIL'IOUS, pertaining to or affected by
bile.--_adv._ BIL'IOUSLY. [Fr.--L. _bilis_.]

BILGE, bilj, _n._ the bulging part of a cask: the broadest part of a ship's
bottom.--_v.i._ to spring a leak by a fracture in the bilge, as a
ship.--_ns._ BILGE'-PUMP; BILGE'-WAT'ER.--_adj._ BILG'Y, having the
appearance and disagreeable smell of bilge-water. [Most prob. conn. with
BULGE.]

BILHARZIA, bil'här-zi-a, _n._ a human parasitic flat worm in the fluke or
Trematode order, with differentiated sexes. [From the helminthologist,
Theodor _Bilharz_.]

BILINGUAL, b[=i]-ling'wal, _adj._ of or containing two tongues or
languages.--Also BILIN'GUAR. [L. _bilinguis_--_bi-_, twice, _lingua_,
tongue.]

BILITERAL, b[=i]-lit'[.e]r-al, _adj._ consisting of two letters. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and _litera_, a letter.]

BILK, bilk, _v.t._ to elude; to cheat. [Perh. a dim. of BALK; at first a
term in cribbage.]

[Illustration]

BILL, bil, _n._ a kind of concave battle-axe with a long wooden handle: a
kind of hatchet with a long blade and wooden handle in the same line with
it, often with a hooked point, used in cutting thorn hedges or in
pruning.--_ns._ BILL'HOOK, a bill or hatchet having a hooked or curved
point; BILL'MAN, a soldier armed with a bill. [A.S. _bil_; Ger. _bille_.]

BILL, bil, _n._ the beak of a bird, or anything like it, applied even to a
sharp promontory, as Portland Bill: the point of the fluke of an
anchor--hence BILL'-BOARD, _n._, used to protect the planking from being
injured by the bill when the anchor is weighed.--_v.i._ to join bills as
doves: to caress fondly.--_adj._ BILLED. [A.S. _bile_, most prob. the same
word as the preceding.]

BILL, bil, _n._ an account of money: a draft of a proposed law: a written
engagement to pay a sum of money at a fixed date: a placard or
advertisement: any written statement of particulars: in the criminal law of
England, the formal name of a written accusation of serious crime preferred
before a grand-jury.--_n._ BILL'-BOOK, a book used in commerce in which an
entry is made of all bills accepted and received.--_n.pl._ BILL'-BROK'ERS,
persons who, being skilled in the money-market, the state of mercantile and
personal credit, and the rates of exchange, engage, either on their own
account or that of their employers, in the purchase and sale of foreign and
inland bills of exchange and promissory notes: the business of
BILL'-DISCOUNT'ERS, or discount-brokers, again, consists in discounting or
advancing the amount of bills of exchange and notes which have some time to
run before they come due, on the faith of the credit of the parties to the
bill.--_n._ BILL'-CHAM'BER, a department of the Court of Session in
Scotland which deals with summary business--so called because formerly both
summonses and diligence or execution were for the most part commenced by a
writ called a bill; BILL'-STICK'ER, one who sticks or posts up bills or
placards.--BILL OF ADVENTURE, a writing by a merchant stating that goods
shipped by him, and in his name, are the property of another, whose
adventure or chance the transaction is--the shipping merchant, on the other
hand, undertaking to account to the adventurer for the produce; BILL OF
COMPLAINT, the name given in the English Court of Chancery, prior to the
Judicature Act of 1873, to the formal statement of the facts and prayer for
relief submitted by a plaintiff to the court; BILL OF COSTS, an account
stating in detail the charges and disbursements of an attorney or solicitor
in the conduct of his client's business; BILL OF EXCEPTIONS, a statement of
objections, by way of appeal, against the decision of a judge who is trying
a case with a jury in the Court of Session; BILL OF EXCHANGE, a document
purporting to be an instrument of pecuniary obligation for value received,
and which is employed for the purpose of settling a debt in a manner
convenient to the parties concerned; BILL OF FARE, in a hotel, the list of
dishes or articles of food; BILL OF HEALTH, an official certificate of the
state of health on board ship before sailing; BILL OF LADING, a paper
signed by the master of a ship, by which he makes himself responsible for
the safe delivery of the goods specified therein; BILL OF MORTALITY, an
official account of the births and deaths occurring in a certain district
within a given time; BILL OF SALE, in English law, a formal deed assigning
personal property, the usual mode of transferring ships, and valuable as
mercantile securities over stock-in-trade, furniture, &c.; BILL OF SIGHT,
an entry of imported goods of which the merchant does not know the quantity
or the quality; BILL OF STORE, a license from the customs authorities to
reimport British goods formerly exported; BILL OF VICTUALLING, a list of
necessary stores shipped from the bonded warehouse, or for drawback on
board vessels proceeding on oversea voyages. [Through Low L. _billa_, from
L. _bulla_, anything round, a knob, a seal appended to a charter, hence a
document bearing a seal, &c. See BULL, an edict.]

BILLET, bil'et, _n._ a little note or paper: a ticket assigning quarters to
soldiers.--_v.t._ to quarter or lodge, as soldiers. [Fr.; dim. of BILL.]

[Illustration]

BILLET, bil'et, _n._ a small log of wood used as fuel: (_archit._) an
ornament in Norman architecture resembling billets of wood.--_n._
BILL'ET-HEAD, a billet or round piece of wood fixed in the bow or stern of
a whale-boat, round which the harpoon-line is turned when the whale is
struck. [Fr. _billette_--_bille_, the young stock of a tree, prob. of Celt.
orig., perh. allied to BOLE, the trunk of a tree.]

BILLET-DOUX, bil-e-d[=oo]', _n._ a sweet note: a love-letter. [Fr.
_billet_, a letter, _doux_, sweet.]

BILLIARDS, bil'yardz, _n._ a game played with a cue or mace and balls on a
table having pockets at the sides and corners.--_adj._ BILL'IARD.--_n._
BILL'IARD-MARK'ER, a person who marks the points made by the players. [Fr.
_billard_--_bille_, a ball.]

BILLINGSGATE, bil'ingz-g[=a]t, _n._ foul and abusive language like that
once familiar to the ear at _Billingsgate_ (the great fish-market of
London).

BILLION, bil'yun, _n._ a million or thousand thousand of millions
(1,000,000,000,000); or, according to the French method of numeration, one
thousand millions (1,000,000,000). [L. _bi-_, twice, and MILLION.]

BILLON, bil'on, _n._ base metal: esp. an alloy of silver with copper, tin,
or the like. [Fr., from same root as BILLET.]

BILLOW, bil'[=o], _n._ a great wave of the sea swelled by the wind:
(_poet._) a wave, the sea.--_v.i._ to roll in large waves.--_adjs._
BILL'OWED, BILL'OWY. [Scand.; Ice. _bylgja_; Sw. _bölja_, Dan. _bölge_, a
wave. See BILGE, BULGE.]

BILLY, BILLIE, bil'i, _n._ a comrade, a companion-in-arms: an Australian
bushman's boiling-pan or tea-pot:--_pl._ BILL'IES.--_n._ BILL'Y-GOAT, a
he-goat. [Prob. from _Bill_, a familiar abbrev. of William.]

BILLYBOY, bil'i-boi, _n._ a bluff-bowed one-masted trading-vessel. [Prob.
conn. with BILANDER.]

BILLYCOCK, bil'i-kok, _n._ a man's low-crowned felt hat. [From
_bully-cocked_, i.e. cocked like the bullies.]

BILOBED, b[=i]'l[=o]bd, BILOBULAR, b[=i]-lob'[=u]-lar, _adj._ having two
lobes. [L. _bi-_, twice, and _lobe_, a LOBULE.]

BILOCATION, b[=i]-lok-[=a]'shun, _n._ the power of being in two places at
the same time. [Coined from _bi-_, twice, and LOCATION.]

BILOCULAR, b[=i]-lok'[=u]-lar, _adj._ divided into two cells. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and L. _loculus_, dim. of _locus_, place.]

BIMANA, b[=i]m'an-a, or bim'an-a, _n._ a term used by Blumenbach, Cuvier,
&c., to describe the human species in contrast to other mammals--now rarely
used, men and monkeys being now zoologically united in the old Linnæan
order--Primates.--_adj._ B[=I]'MANOUS.

BIMENSAL, b[=i]-mens'al, _adj._ happening once in two months:
bimonthly.--_adj._ BIMES'TRIAL, of two months' duration. [L. _bi-_, and
_mensis_, a month.]

BIMETALLISM, b[=i]-met'al-izm, _n._ the name given to a monetary system in
which gold and silver are on precisely the same footing as regards mintage
and legal tender.--_adj._ BIMETAL'LIC, adapted to that standard.--_n._ and
_adj._ BIMET'ALLIST. [A recent coinage, from Gr. _bi-_, double, and METAL.]

BIMONTHLY, b[=i]-munth'li, _adj._ once in two months; also twice a month.
[L. _bi-_, two, and MONTH.]

BIN, bin, _n._ a place for storing corn, wine. [A.S. _binn_, a manger.]

BIN, bin, (_Shak._) used for BE and BEEN.

BINARY, b[=i]'nar-i, _adj._ composed of two: twofold.--_adjs._ B[=I]'NATE,
growing in pairs: double; BINAUR'AL, having two ears: needing the use of
both ears.--BINARY SCALE (_math._), the scale of notation whose radix or
base is 2 (instead of 10); BINARY THEORY (_chem._), that which assumes all
salts to contain merely two substances, either both simple, or one simple
and the other a compound playing the part of a simple body. [L.
_binarius_--_bini_, two by two--_bis_, twice.]

BIND, b[=i]nd, _v.t._ to tie or fasten together with a band (with _to_,
_upon_): to encircle round (with _about_, _with_): to sew a border on: to
tie up or bandage a limb, or the like: to fasten together (the leaves of a
book) and put a cover on: to lay under obligation to answer a charge: to
oblige by oath or promise _to_ or _from_ an action: to restrain, to make
fast any one--also of disease, a magic spell, a passion, &c.: to hold or
cement firmly: to render hard.--_v.i._ to produce constipation:--_pa.t._
and _pa.p._ bound.--_n._ a stalk of hops, so called from its twining or
binding itself round a pole or tree: the indurated clay of coal-mines:
(_mus._) the tie for grouping notes together.--_ns._ BIND'ER, one who
binds, as books or sheaves: an attachment to a reaping-machine for tying
the bundles of grain cut and thrown off, a reaping-machine provided with
such; BIND'ERY (U.S.), a bookbinder's establishment.--_adj._ BIND'ING,
restraining: obligatory.--_n._ the act of binding: anything that binds: the
covering of a book.--_ns._ BIND'WEED, the convolvulus, a genus of plants,
so called from their twining or binding; BINE, the slender stem of a
climbing plant.--I DARE or WILL BE BOUND, I will be responsible for the
statement. [A.S. _bindan_; cog. with Ger. _binden_, Sans. _bandh_.]

BINERVATE, b[=i]-n[.e]rv'[=a]t, _adj._ (_bot._) applied to leaves that have
two ribs or nerves: (_entom._) having the wings supported by two nerves.
[L. _bi-_, _bis_, twice, and NERVE.]

BING, bing, _n._ a heap or pile, often applied like BIN. [Scand.]

BINGO, bing'[=o], _n._ a familiar name for brandy. [Prob. B, and STINGO.]

BINK, bingk, _n._ a Scotch form of BENCH.

BINNACLE, bin'a-kl, _n._ (_naut._) the box in which on shipboard the
compass is kept. [Formerly _bittacle_--Port. _bitácola_--L. _habitaculum_,
a dwelling-place--_habit-[=a]re_, to dwell.]

BINOCLE, bin'o-kl, _n._ a telescope through which an object can be viewed
with both eyes at the same time.--_adj._ BINOC'ULAR, having two eyes:
suitable for two eyes.--_adv._ BINOC'ULARLY. [L. _bini_, two by two,
_oculus_, an eye.]

BINOMIAL, b[=i]-n[=o]m'i-al, _adj._ and _n._ (_alg._) a quantity consisting
of two terms or parts, as _a_+b.--BINOMIAL THEOREM, a series of analytical
formulæ by which any power of a binomial can be expressed and developed.
[L. _bi-_, _bis_, twice, and _nomen_, a name, a term.]

BINTURONG, bin't[=u]-rong, _n._ the native name for an Indian
prehensile-tailed carnivore, akin to the civet.

BIO-, b[=i]'[=o], a prefix from Gr. _bios_, life, used in many scientific
words to express having organic life.--_adj._ BIOBIBLIOGRAPH'ICAL, dealing
with the life and writings of any one.--_n._ B[=I]'OBLAST, a formative
cell, a minute mass of bioplasm or protoplasm about to become a definite
cell.--_adj._ BIODYNAM'ICAL.--_ns._ BIODYNAM'ICS, that part of biology
which deals with vital force; BIOGENESIS (-jen'e-sis), the process of
natural generation of life from life, as opposed to spontaneous generation,
or abiogenesis.--_adj._ BIOGENET'IC.--_ns._ BIOG'ENIST; BIOG'ENY;
BIOMAG'NETISM, animal magnetism; BIOM'ETRY, the measurement or calculation
of the probable duration of life; B[=I]'OPLASM, the germinal matter of all
living beings.

BIOGRAPH, b[=i]'o-graf, _n._ a name sometimes applied to a form of the
zoetrope contrived so as to exhibit the successive movements of a living
body, thus simulating life. [Gr. _bios_, life, _graphein_, to write,
describe.]

BIOGRAPHY, b[=i]-og'raf-i, _n._ a written account or history of the life of
an individual: the art of writing such accounts.--_n._ BIOG'RAPHER, one who
writes biography.--_adjs._ BIOGRAPH'IC, -AL.--_adv._ BIOGRAPH'ICALLY. [Gr.
_bios_, life, _graphein_, to write.]

BIOLOGY, b[=i]-ol'oj-i, _n._ the science that treats of life or of
organised beings, which seeks to classify and generalise the multitude of
phenomena presented by and peculiar to the living world.--_adj._
BIOLOG'ICAL.--_adv._ BIOLOG'ICALLY.--_n._ BIOLO'GIST, one who studies
biology. [Gr. _bios_, life, _logos_, a discourse.]

BIOTAXY, b[=i]'[=o]-tak-si, _n._ classification according to the sum of the
morphological character. [Gr. _bios_, life, and TAXIS.]

BIOTIC, b[=i]-ot'ik, _adj._ pertaining to life. [Gr. _bios_, life.]

BIPAROUS, bip'ar-us, _adj._ bearing two at a birth. [L. _bis_, twice,
_par-[)e]re_, to bring forth.]

BIPARTITE, bi'part-[=i]t, or b[=i]-pärt'[=i]t, _adj._ divided into two like
parts.--_n._ BIPARTI'TION, the act of dividing into two corresponding
parts. [L. _bi-_, _bis_, twice, _partitus_, divided--_part-[=i]re_, to
divide.]

BIPED, b[=i]'ped, _n._ an animal with two feet.--_adjs._ B[=I]'PED,
B[=I]'PEDAL, having two feet. [L. _bipes_--_bi-_, _bis_, twice, _ped-em_,
foot.]

BIPENNATE, b[=i]-pen'[=a]t, BIPENNATED, b[=i]-pen'[=a]t-ed, _adj._ having
two wings. [L. _bi-_, and PENNATE.]

BIPENNIS, b[=i]-pen'nis, _n._ an axe with two blades, one on each side of
the handle, usually seen depicted in the hands of the Amazons. [L.--_bis_,
twice, _penna_, wing.]

BIPETALOUS, b[=i]-pet'al-us, _adj._ having two petals or flower-leaves. [L.
_bi-_, twice, and PETAL.]

BIPINNATE, b[=i]-pin'n[=a]t, _adj._ doubly pinnate. [L. _bi-_, twice, and
PINNATE.]

BIQUADRATIC, b[=i]-kwod-rat'ik, _n._ a quantity twice squared, or raised to
the fourth power.--BIQUADRATIC EQUATION, an equation with one unknown
quantity raised to the fourth power; BIQUADRATIC ROOT, the square root of
the square root of a number. [L. _bi-_ twice, and _quadratus_, squared.]

BIQUINTILE, b[=i]-kwin'til, _n._ (_astron._) the aspect of planets when
they are twice the fifth part (144 degrees) of a great circle from each
other. [L. _bi-_, twice, _quintus_, the fifth.]

BIRCH, b[.e]rch, _n._ a hardy forest-tree, with smooth, white bark and very
durable wood: a rod for punishment, consisting of a birch twig or
twigs.--_adjs._ BIRCH, BIRCH'EN, made of birch. [A.S. _berc_, _bierce_;
Ice. _björk_, Sans. _bh[=u]rja_.]

BIRD, b[.e]rd, _n._ a general name for feathered animals.--_v.i._ to catch
or snare birds.--_ns._ BIRD'-BOLT (_Shak._), a short thick bolt or arrow
with a blunted point, used for killing birds without piercing them;
BIRD'-CAGE, a cage or box made of wire and wood for holding birds;
BIRD'-CALL, an instrument used by fowlers to call or allure birds to them,
by imitating their notes; BIRD'-CATCH'ER, one who catches birds: a fowler;
BIRD'-CATCH'ING, the art or practice of catching birds; BIRD'-CHER'RY, a
bush bearing an astringent wild-fruit in drupes.--_adj._ BIRD'-EYED, having
eyes quick of sight, like those of a bird: quick-sighted.--_ns._
BIRD'-FAN'CIER, one who has a fancy for rearing birds: one who keeps birds
for sale; BIRD'ING (_Shak._), catching birds by means of hawks trained for
the purpose; BIRD'ING-PIECE, a fowling-piece; BIRD'-LIME, a sticky
substance used for catching birds; BIRD'-OF-PAR'ADISE, a kind of Eastern
bird with splendid plumage; BIRD'S'-EYE, a kind of tobacco; BIRD'S'-NEST,
the nest in which a bird lays her eggs and hatches her young;
BIRD'-SP[=I]'DER, a species of large spiders which prey on small birds,
found in Brazil.--_adj._ BIRD'-WIT'TED, flighty: incapable of sustained
attention.--BIRD'S-EYE VIEW, a general view from above, as if by a bird on
the wing, a representation of such, a general view or résumé of a subject;
BIRD'S-FOOT TREFOIL, the popular name of several leguminous plants, having
clusters of cylindrical pods resembling a bird's foot.--A LITTLE BIRD TOLD
ME, I heard in a way I will not reveal. [A.S. _brid_, the young of a bird,
a bird: either from root of BREED (_bredan_, to breed) or of BIRTH
(_beran_, to bear).]

BIREME, b[=i]'r[=e]m, _n._ an ancient vessel with two rows of oars.
[Fr.--L. _biremis_--_bi-_, twice, and _remus_, an oar.]

[Illustration]

BIRETTA, bir-et'a, _n._ a square cap worn by clergy--by priests, black;
bishops, purple; cardinals, red. [It. _berretta_--Low L. _birretum_, a
cap.]

BIRK, b[.e]rk, _n._ Scotch and prov. Eng. for BIRCH.--_adj._ BIRK'EN
(_Scot._), birchen.

BIRKIE, birk'i, _n._ a strutting or swaggering fellow: a fellow
generally.--_adj._ active. [_Scot._ A dubious connection with Scand.
_berkja_, to bark, boast, has been suggested.]

BIRL, birl, _v.t._ to spin anything round: to throw down a coin as one's
share in a joint contribution.--_v.i._ to whirl round. [_Scot._, an
onomatopoeic word.]

BIRLE, birl, _v.t._ and _v.i._ (_Scot._) to ply with drink: to
carouse.--_ns._ BIRL'ER (_Cumberland_); BIRL'ING, the act of drawing
liquor. [A.S. _byrelian_, _byrele_, a cup-bearer, _beran_, to bear.]

BIRLINN, bir'lin, _n._ a chief's barge in the Western Isles. [Gael.]

BIRMINGHAMISE, bir'ming-ham-[=i]z, _v.t._ to make up artificially. [See
BRUMMAGEM.]

BIROSTRATE, b[=i]-ros'tr[=a]t, _adj._ having a double beak. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and _rostratus_, beaked--_rostrum_, a beak.]

BIRR, bir, _n._ impetus: a violent push: stress in pronunciation: any sharp
whirring sound. [_Scot._; Ice. _byrr_, a favouring wind.]

BIRSE, birs, _n._ bristle.--_adj._ BIRS'Y.--TO LICK THE BIRSE, to draw a
hog's bristle through the mouth--part of the ceremony of citizenship in
Selkirk; TO SET UP ONE'S BIRSE, to rouse the wrath of, from the habit of
animals bristling up when enraged. [Scot.; A.S. _byrst_.]

BIRSLE, birs'l, _v.t._ to scorch, to toast. [Scot.]

BIRTH, b[.e]rth, _n._ a ship's station at anchor. [Same as BERTH.]

BIRTH, b[.e]rth, _n._ the act of bearing or bringing forth: the offspring
born: dignity of family: origin.--_n._ BIRTH'DAY, the day on which one is
born, or the anniversary of that day.--_adj._ relating to the day of one's
birth.--_ns._ BIRTH'DAY-BOOK, a book in diary form, in which the birthdays
of one's friends are entered in their autographs; BIRTH'DOM (_Shak._),
birthright; BIRTH'-MARK, a peculiar mark on one's body at birth;
BIRTH'NIGHT, the night on which one is born, or the anniversary of that
night; BIRTH'PLACE, the place of one's birth; BIRTH'RIGHT, the right or
privilege to which one is entitled by birth: native rights.--_adj._
BIRTH'-STRANG'LED (_Shak._), strangled in birth.--_n._ BIRTH'-WORT, a genus
of perennial plants, formerly used medicinally in cases of difficult
parturition. [M. E. _birÞe_, prob. Scand.; cf. Goth, _ga-baurÞs_, Ger.
_ge-burt_.]

BIS, bis, _adv._ twice: (_mus._) a direction that a passage is to be
repeated [L.].--_n._ B[=I]SEG'MENT, a segment of a line or figure cut into
two equal parts.--_adjs._ B[=I]SER'RATE (_bot._), doubly serrate;
B[=I]SEX'UAL, of both sexes: (_bot._) applied to flowers which contain both
stamens and pistils within the same envelope.

BISCAYAN, bis'k[=a]-an, _adj._ and _n._ of or pertaining to the Basque
province of _Biscay_ in Spain, or its people: Basque generally: a long
heavy musket, or the bullet fired by such.

BISCUIT, bis'kit, _n._ hard dry bread in small cakes: a kind of unglazed
earthenware. [O. Fr. _bescoit_ (mod. _biscuit_)--L. _bis_, twice,
_coqu[)e]re_, _coctum_, to cook or bake.]

BISE, b[=e]z, _n._ a cold north or north-east wind prevalent at certain
seasons in Switzerland and neighbouring parts of France and Italy. [Fr.]

BISECT, b[=i]-sekt', _v.t._ to cut into two equal parts.--_n._ BISEC'TION.
[L. _bi_, twice, and _sec[=a]re_, _sectum_, to cut.]

BISERIAL, b[=i]-s[=e]'ri-al, _adj._ arranged in two series or rows. [L.
_bi-_, and SERIES.]

BISHOP, bish'op, _n._ in the Western and Eastern Churches, and in the
Anglican communion, a clergyman consecrated for the spiritual direction of
a diocese, under an archbishop, and over the priests or presbyters and
deacons: a spiritual overseer in the early Christian Church, whether of a
local church or of a number of churches--the terms _bishop_ [Gr.
_episcopos_] and _presbyter_ [Gr. _presbyteros_] are used interchangeably
in the New Testament for the officers who direct the discipline and
administer the affairs of a single congregation--the differentiation in
function and dignity is, however, well marked by the end of the 2d century:
one of the pieces or men in chess, from the upper part being carved into
the shape of a bishop's mitre (formerly the _archer_): a wholesome hot
drink compounded of red wine (claret, Burgundy, &c.) poured warm or cold
upon ripe bitter oranges, sugared and spiced to taste.--_v.t._
(_jocularly_) to play the bishop, to confirm: to supply with bishops: to
let milk or the like burn while cooking.--_ns._ BISH'OPESS, a she-bishop, a
bishop's wife; BISH'OPRIC, the office and jurisdiction of a bishop: a
diocese--also BISH'OPDOM.--BISHOP IN PARTIBUS (see PARTIBUS). [A.S.
_biscop_--L. _episcopus_--Gr. _episcopos_, an overseer--_epi_, upon,
_skop-ein_, to view.]

BISK. See BISQUE (1).

BISMAR, bis'mar, _n._ a kind of steelyard still used in Orkney. [Dan.
_bismer_.]

BISMILLAH, bis-mil'a, _interj._ in the name of Allah or God--a common
Mohammedan exclamation. [Ar.]

BISMUTH, biz'muth, _n._ a brittle metal of a reddish-white colour used in
the arts and in medicine. [Ger. _bismuth_, _wissmuth_; origin unknown.]

BISON, b[=i]'son, or bis'on, _n._ a large wild animal like the bull, found
in Lithuania, the Caucasus, &c., with shaggy hair and a fatty hump on its
shoulders.--The American 'buffalo' is also a bison. [From L. pl.
_bisontes_, prob. of Teut. origin; cf. Old High Ger. _wisunt_, A.S.
_wesend_.]

BISQUE, bisk, _n._ a rich soup made of meat or fish slowly stewed and
seasoned, crayfish soup.--Also BISK. [Fr.]

BISQUE, bisk, _n._ pottery that has undergone the first firing before being
glazed. [See BISCUIT.]

BISQUE, bisk, _n._ a term at tennis for the odds given by one player to
another, in allowing him to score one point once during the set--a means of
equalising a strong and a weak player. [Fr.]

BISSEXTILE, bis-sext'il, _n._ leap-year.--_adj._ containing the BISSEXT (L.
_bissextus_), or extra day which the Julian calendar inserts in
leap-year--the sixth before the kalends of March, 24th February. [L. _bis_,
twice, and _sextus_, sixth.]

BISSON, bis'son, _adj._ (_Shak._) blind, blinding. [A.S. _bísene_, blind.]

BISTORT, bis'tort, _n._ a perennial plant with astringent properties
(_Polygonum bistorta_), so named from its twisted roots, called also
_Snakeweed_ and _Adder's Wort_. [Fr.--L. _bistorta_; _bis_, twice, _torta_,
twisted.]

BISTOURY, bis't[=oo]r-i, _n._ a narrow surgical knife for making incisions,
having a straight, convex, or concave edge. [Fr.]

BISTRE, BISTER, bis't[.e]r, _n._ a pigment of a warm brown colour made from
the soot of wood, esp. beechwood.--_adj._ BIS'TRED. [Fr. _bistré_; origin
unknown.]

BISULCATE, b[=i]-sul'k[=a]t, _adj._ (_zool._) cloven-footed. [L. _bi-_,
twice, _sulcus_, a furrow.]

BISULPHATE, b[=i]-sul'f[=a]t, _n._ a salt of sulphuric acid, in which
one-half of the hydrogen of the acid is replaced by a metal. [L. _bi-_,
twice, and SULPHATE.]

BIT, bit, _n._ a bite, a morsel: a small piece: the smallest degree: a
small tool for boring (see BRACE): the part of the bridle which the horse
holds in his mouth (see BRIDLE)--hence, TO TAKE THE BIT IN HIS TEETH, to be
beyond restraint.--_v.t._ to put the bit in the mouth; to curb or
restrain:--_pr.p._ bit'ting; _pa.p._ bit'ted.--BIT BY BIT, piecemeal,
gradually. [From BITE.]

BITCH, bich, _n._ the female of the dog, wolf, and fox. [A.S. _bicce_; Ice.
_bikkja_.]

BITE, b[=i]t, _v.t._ to seize or tear with the teeth: to sting or pain: to
wound by reproach: to deceive, or take in--now only passive:--_pa.t._ bit;
_pa.p._ bit or bit'ten.--_n._ a grasp by the teeth: a nibble at the bait by
a fish: something bitten off: a mouthful.--_v.t._ BITE'-IN, to eat out the
lines of an etching with acid: to repress.--_n._ BIT'ER, one who bites: a
fish apt to take the bait: a cheat.--_n._ and _adj._ BIT'ING.--TO BITE THE
DUST, to fall, to die; TO BITE THE THUMB, to express defiance by putting
the thumbnail into the mouth and knocking it against the teeth. [A.S.
_bítan_; Goth. _beitan_, Ice. _bita_, Ger. _beissen_.]

BITT, bit, _v.t._ (_naut._) to fasten round the BITTS (q.v.).

BITTACLE. Same as BINNACLE.

BITTER, bit'[.e]r, _adj._ biting or acrid to the taste: sharp:
painful.--_n._ any substance having a bitter taste.--_adj._
BITT'ERISH.--_adv._ BITT'ERLY.--_n._ BITT'ERNESS.--_n.pl._ BITT'ERS, a
liquid prepared from bitter herbs or roots, and used as a stomachic.--_n._
BITT'ER-SWEET, the Woody Nightshade, a slender, climbing hedge-plant,
having red poisonous berries, said to be named from its root, when chewed,
having first a bitter, then a sweet taste: (_Shak._) an apple that has a
compound taste of sweet and bitter: a mixture of sweet and bitter. [A.S.
_bítan_, to bite.]

BITTER (_Spens._), used for BITTERN.

BITTERN, bit'[.e]rn, _n._ a bird of the heron family, said to have been
named from the resemblance of its voice to the lowing of a bull. [M. E.
_bittour_--Fr.--Low L. _butorius_ (_bos_, _taurus_).]

BITTERN, bit'[.e]rn, _n._ an oily liquid remaining in salt-works after the
crystallisation of the salt, and used in the manufacture of Epsom salts.

BITTOR, BITTOUR, bit'tur, _n._ (_Dryden_) the bird BITTERN.

BITTS, bits, _n._ a frame in the forepart of a ship round which the cables
are passed when the vessel rides at anchor.

BITUMEN, bi-t[=u]'men, or bit'yu-men, _n._ a name applied to various
inflammable mineral substances, as naphtha, petroleum, asphaltum.--_v.t._
BIT[=U]'MINATE, to mix with or make into bitumen--also
BIT[=U]'MINISE.--_adjs._ BIT[=U]'MINOUS, BIT[=U]MED' (_Shak._), impregnated
with bitumen. [L.]

BIVALVE, b[=i]'valv, _n._ an animal having a shell in two valves or parts,
like the oyster: a seed-vessel of like kind.--_adj._ having two
valves.--_adj._ BIVALV'ULAR. [L. _bi-_, twice, _valva_, a valve.]

BIVIOUS, biv'i-us, _adj._ leading two, or different, ways. [L.
_bivius_--_bi-_, twice, _via_, a way.]

BIVOUAC, biv'[=oo]-ak, _n._ the resting at night of soldiers in the open
air, instead of under cover in camp.--_v.i._ to pass the night in the open
air:--_pr.p._ biv'ouacking; _pa.p._ biv'ouacked. [Fr.--Ger. _beiwacht_, to
watch beside--_bei_ by, _wachen_, to watch.]

BI-WEEKLY, b[=i]'-w[=e]k'li, _adj._ properly, occurring once in two weeks,
but usually twice in every week. [L. _bi-_, twice, and WEEK.]

BIZARRE, bi-zär', _adj._ odd: fantastic: extravagant.--_n._ BIZAR'RERIE.
[Fr.--Sp. _bizarro_, high-spirited; acc. to Littré, adapted from Basque
_bizarre_, the beard.]

BIZCACHA. See VISCACHA.

BLAB, blab, _v.i._ to talk much: to tell tales.--_v.t._ to tell what ought
to be kept secret (with _out_, _forth_):--_pr.p._ blab'bing; _pa.p._
blabbed.--_n._ an open-mouthed person, a tattler: tattling.--_n._ BLAB'BER,
one who blabs. [M. E. _blabbe_, a chatterer, also BLABBER, to babble, with
which cf. Norse _blabbra_, Ger. _plappern_.]

BLACK, blak, _adj._ of the darkest colour: without colour: obscure: dismal:
sullen: horrible: dusky: foul, dirty: malignant: dark-haired, wearing dark
armour or clothes.--_n._ black colour: absence of colour: a negro:
mourning: the dark smut which attacks wheat: a speck of black on the face,
a sooty particle in the air: black clothes, esp. dress trousers.--_v.t._ to
make black: to soil or stain: to draw in black.--_n._ BLACK'AMOOR, a black
Moor: a negro.--_adjs._ BLACK'-AND-TAN, having black hair on the back, and
tan or yellowish-brown elsewhere, esp. of a terrier; BLACK'-A-VISED, of
dark complexion (probably originally _black-à-vis_).--_v.t._ BLACK'BALL, to
reject in voting by putting a black ball into a ballot-box.--_ns._
BLACK'BALLING, the act of so rejecting a candidate; BLACK'-BAND, iron ore
containing enough of coal to calcine it; BLACK'-BEE'TLE, a cockroach;
BLACK'BERRY, the berry of the bramble; BLACK'BIRD, a species of thrush of a
black colour: a current name for a negro or Polynesian kidnapped for
labour; BLACK'BIRDING, the kidnapping of such; BLACK'BOARD, a board painted
black, used in schools for writing, forming figures, &c.--_adjs._
BLACK'-BOD'ING, of evil omen; BLACK'-BROWED, having black eyebrows:
sullen.--_ns._ BLACK'-CAP, a bird, a species of warbler, so called from its
black crown: (_cook._) an apple roasted until it is black, and served up in
a custard: the full-dress cap put on by English judges when about to
pronounce sentence of death; BLACK'-CATT'LE, oxen, bulls, and cows;
BLACK'-CHALK, a variety of clay-slate of a bluish-black colour, used for
drawing, and also for making black paint; BLACK'COCK, a species of grouse,
common in the north of England and in Scotland; BLACK'-CURR'ANT, a garden
shrub with black fruit used in making preserves; BLACK'-DEATH, a name given
to the plague of the 14th century from the black spots which appeared on
the skin; BLACK'-DRAUGHT, the popular name for a purgative medicine
consisting chiefly of senna and Epsom salts; BLACK'-DROP, a liquid
preparation of opium, vinegar, and sugar.--_v.t._ BLACK'EN, to make black:
to defame.--_adj._ BLACK'FACED, having a black face: dismal.--_ns._
BLACK'-FLAG, the flag of a pirate, or that hoisted at the execution of a
criminal--from its colour; BLACK'-FRIAR, a friar of the Dominican order, so
called from his black mantle (over a white woollen habit): (_pl._) the
region in a city, as London, where their convent stood; BLACKGUARD
(blag'ärd), originally applied to the lowest menials about a court, who
took charge of the pots, kettles, &c.: a low, ill-conducted fellow.--_adj._
low: scurrilous.--_v.t._ to treat as a blackguard; _v.i._ to play the
blackguard.--_n._ BLACK'GUARDISM.--_adv._ BLACK'GUARDLY.--_ns._
BLACK'-HEART'EDNESS; BLACK'-HOLE, formerly the name for the punishment-cell
in a barrack: the memorable black-hole in the Fort-William barracks at
Calcutta, into which, in in 1756, as many as 146 Europeans were thrust over
night, of whom only 23 were found surviving in the morning; BLACK'ING, a
substance used for blacking leather, &c.--_adj._ BLACK'ISH.--_ns._
BLACK'-JACK, a vessel for holding drink, originally made of leather:
(_naut._) the flag of a pirate; BLACK'-LEAD, a black mineral (plumbago, not
lead) used in making pencils, blacking grates, &c.; BLACK'LEG, a low,
gambling fellow: a turf-swindler: a term applied by strikers to men willing
to work for the wages against which themselves have struck--also
BLACK'-NEB; BLACK'-LET'TER, the old English (also called Gothic) letter
([Black-letter]); BLACK'-LIST, a list of defaulters; BLACK'-MAR[=I]'A, the
closely covered, usually black-painted van in which prisoners are conveyed
between the court and the prison; BLACK'-MON'DAY, Easter Monday, so called
on account of the sufferings experienced by the army of Edward III. from
the severity of the weather on that day in 1360; BLACK'-MONK, a monk of the
order of St Benedict, from his garments; BLACK'NESS; BLACK'-PUDD'ING, a
blood-pudding (q.v.).; BLACK'-ROD, the usher of the chapter of the Garter
and of the House of Lords, so called from the black wand tipped with a
golden lion which he carries; BLACK'-SHEEP, a disreputable member of a
family or group; BLACK'SMITH, a smith who works in iron, as opposed to a
_Whitesmith_, or one who works in tin; BLACK'THORN, a species of
dark-coloured thorn: the sloe: a stick made from its stem.--_adjs._
BLACK'-TRESSED, having black tresses; BLACK-VISAGED (blak'-viz'[=a]jd),
having a black visage or appearance.--_n._ BLACK'-WASH, a lotion of calomel
and lime-water: anything that blackens.--BLACK AND BLUE, with the livid
colour of a bruise in the flesh; BLACK BOOK, an official book bound in
black, a book recording the names of persons deserving punishment; BLACK
EYE, an eye of which the iris is dark--a point of beauty: a discoloration
around the eye due to a blow or fall; BLACK FELLOW, a native in
Australia.--IN BLACK AND WHITE, in writing or in print: in art, in no
colours but black and white.--TO BE BLACK IN THE FACE, to have the face
purple through strangulation, passion, or effort; TO BE IN ANY ONE'S BLACK
BOOKS, to have incurred any one's displeasure; TO BLACK OUT, to obliterate
with black. [A.S. _blac_, _blæc_, black.]

BLACK-ART, blak'-ärt, _n._ necromancy: magic. [Acc. to Trench, a
translation of the Low L. _nigromantia_, substituted erroneously for the
Gr. _necromanteia_ (see NECROMANCY), as if the first syllable had been L.
_niger_, black.]

BLACKMAIL, blak'm[=a]l, _n._ rent or tribute formerly paid to robbers for
protection: hush-money extorted under threat of exposure or denunciation,
esp. of a baseless charge.--_v.t._ to extort money from a person by this
expedient. [BLACK and A.S. _mal_, tribute, toll.]

BLAD, blad, _n._ a fragment of anything, a good lump. [Scot.]

BLADDER, blad'[.e]r, _n._ a thin bag distended with liquid or air: the
receptacle for the urine.--_adjs._ BLADD'ERED, BLADD'ERY, swollen like a
bladder.--_n._ BLADD'ERWORT, a genus of slender aquatic plants, the leaves
floating. [A.S. _bl['æ]dre_--_blawan_; Old Ger. _blahan_, _blajan_, to
blow; Ger. _blase_, bladder--_blasen_, to blow; cf. L. _flat-us_, breath.]

BLADE, bl[=a]d, _n._ the leaf or flat part of grass or corn: the cutting
part of a knife, sword, &c.: the flat part of an oar: a dashing
fellow.--_n._ BLADE'BONE, the flat bone at the back of the shoulder: the
scapula.--_adj._ BLAD'ED. [A.S. _blæd_; Ice. _blad_, Ger. _blatt_.]

BLAE, bl[=a], _adj._ blackish or blue in colour: livid: bleak.--_n._
BLAE'BERRY, Scotch name for the bilberry or whortleberry. [M. E. _blo_,
_bloo_--Scand. _blá_.]

BLAGUE, blag, _n._ blustering humbug. [Fr.]

BLAIN, bl[=a]n, _n._ a boil or blister. [A.S. _blegen_, a blister, prob.
from _blawan_, to blow.]

BLAME, bl[=a]m, _v.t._ to find fault with: to censure.--_n._ imputation of
a fault: crime: censure.--_adj._ BLAM'ABLE, deserving of blame:
faulty.--_n._ BLAM'ABLENESS.--_adv._ BLAM'ABLY.--_adj._ BLAME'FUL, meriting
blame: criminal.--_adv._ BLAME'FULLY.--_n._ BLAME'FULLNESS.--_adj._
BLAMELESS, without blame: guiltless: innocent.--_adv._ BLAME'LESSLY.--_ns._
BLAME'LESSNESS; BLAME'WORTHINESS, quality of being worthy of blame:
blamableness.--_adj._ BLAME'WORTHY, worthy of blame: culpable. [Fr.
_blâmer_, _blasmer_--Gr. _blasph[=e]me_-_ein_, to speak ill. See
BLASPHEME.]

BLANCH, blansh, _v.t._ to whiten.--_v.i._ to grow white. [Fr.
_blanchir_--_blanc_, white. See BLANK.]

BLANC-MANGE, bla-mawngzh', _n._ a white jelly prepared with milk. [Fr.
_blanc_, white, _manger_, food.]

BLAND, bland, _adj._ smooth: gentle: mild.--_adv._ BLANDLY.--_n._
BLAND'NESS. [L. _blandus_, perh.--_mla_(_n_)_dus_--Eng. _mild_.]

BLAND, bland, _n._ an Orcadian name for butter-milk and water. [Scand.
_blanda_.]

BLANDISH, bland'ish, _v.t._ to flatter and coax, to cajole.--_n._
BLAND'ISHMENT, act of expressing fondness: flattery: winning expressions or
actions. [Fr. _blandir_, _blandiss-_, from L. _bland[=i]ri_.]

BLANK, blangk, _adj._ without writing or marks, as in white paper: empty,
empty of results: vacant, confused: (_poetry_) not having rhyme.--_n._ a
paper without writing: a lottery-ticket having no mark, and therefore
valueless: an empty space, a void, or vacancy: (_archery_) the white mark
in the centre of a target at which an arrow is aimed, hence the object or
aim of anything: a form of document having blank spaces afterwards to be
filled in.--_v.t._ to make pale: (_Milton_) to confuse.--_n._
BLANK'-CART'RIDGE, a cartridge without a bullet.--_p.adj._ BLANKED, a
minced form of _damned_, from the usual form of printing d----d.--_adv._
BLANK'LY.--_ns._ BLANK'NESS; BLANK'-VERSE, verse without rhyme, esp. the
heroic verse of five feet. [Fr. _blanc_, from root of Ger. _blinken_, to
glitter--Old High Ger. _blichen_, Gr. _phlegein_, to shine.]

BLANKET, blangk'et, _n._ a white woollen covering for beds: a covering for
horses, &c.--_v.t._ to cover with a blanket: to toss in a blanket.--_n._
BLANK'ETING, cloth for blankets: the punishment of being tossed in a
blanket. [Fr. _blanchet_, dim. of _blanc_, from its null white colour,]

BLARE, bl[=a]r, _v.i._ to roar, to sound loudly, as a trumpet.--_n._ roar,
noise. [M. E. _blaren_, orig. _blasen_, from A.S. _blæsan_, to blow. See
BLAST.]

BLARNEY, blar'ni, _n._ pleasing flattery or cajoling talk.--_v.t._ to
beguile with such. [_Blarney_ Castle, near Cork, where there is a stone
difficult to reach, he who kisses which ever after possesses the gift of
blarney.]

BLASÉ, bla-z[=a], _adj._ fatigued with pleasures, used up. [Fr. _blaser_.]

BLASH, blash, _n._ watery stuff.--_adj._ BLASH'Y. [Scot.]

BLASPHEME, blas-f[=e]m', _v.t._ and _v.i._ to speak impiously of, as of
God: to curse and swear.--_n._ BLASPHEM'ER.--_adj._ BLAS'PHEMOUS,
containing blasphemy: impious.--_adv._ BLAS'PHEMOUSLY.--_n._ BLAS'PHEMY,
profane speaking: contempt or indignity offered to God. [Gr.
_blasph[=e]me-ein_--_blaptein_, to hurt, _ph[=e]mi_ to speak. See BLAME.]

BLAST, blast, _n._ a blowing or gust of wind: a forcible stream of air:
sound of a wind instrument; an explosion of gunpowder: anything
pernicious.--_v.t._ to strike with some pernicious influence, to blight: to
affect with sudden violence or calamity: to rend asunder with
gunpowder.--_adj._ BLAST'ED, blighted: cursed, damned.--_ns._
BLAST'-FUR'NACE, a smelting furnace into which hot air is blown;
BLAST'-HOLE, a hole in the bottom of a pump through which water enters;
BLAST'ING, the separating of masses of stone by means of an explosive
substance; BLAST'ING-GEL'ATINE, a powerful explosive made of gun-cotton and
nitro-glycerine; BLAST'MENT, withering or shrivelling up caused by
blasting; BLAST'-PIPE, a pipe in a steam-engine, to convey the waste-steam
up the chimney. [A.S. _bl['æ]st_; cf. Ice. _beása_; Ger. _blasen_.]

BLASTODERM, blas'to-derm, _n._ an embryological term applied to the layer
or layers of cells arising from the germinal disc, or the portion of a
partially segmenting egg which undergoes division. [Gr. _blasto-_,
_blastos_, a sprout, _derma_, _dermat-_, skin.]

BLATANT, bl[=a]t'ant, _adj._ noisy, clamorous, loud.--_adv._ BLAT'ANTLY.
[Prob. a coinage of Spenser.]

BLATE, bl[=a]t, _adj._ bashful, timidly awkward. [Scot.; A.S. _blát_,
pale.]

BLATTER, blat't[.e]r, _v.i._ to talk overmuch, to prate.--_v.i._ to hurry
or rush noisily.--_n._ a clatter of words, sound of rapid motion. [L.
_blater[=a]re_.]

BLAWORT, blä'wort, _n._ the harebell: the corn blue-bottle.--Also
BL[=E]'WART. [Scot. BLAE, and _wort_, herb.]

BLAY, bl[=a], _n._ the fish _bleak_.--Also BLEY. [See BLEAK, a fish.]

BLAZE, bl[=a]z, _n._ a rush of light or of flame: a bursting out or active
display: a white spot on the face of a horse or ox: a mark made on a tree
by cutting off a strip of bark to mark a track or a boundary.--_v.i._ to
burn with a flame: to throw out light.--_n._ BLAZ'ER, a cricket or golf
jacket of bright colour.--BLAZES, from the fires of hell, in imprecations
like TO BLAZES; also LIKE BLAZES = with fury.--TO BLAZE A TREE, to make a
white mark by cutting off a piece of the bark. [A.S. _blæse_, a torch, from
root of BLOW.]

BLAZE, bl[=a]z, Blazon, bl[=a]'zn, _v.t._ to proclaim, to spread
abroad.--_n._ BLAZ'ER (_Spens._), one who spreads abroad or proclaims.
[Same as BLARE; BLAZON is the M. E. _blasen_, with the _n_ retained.]

BLAZON, bl[=a]'zn, _v.t._ to make public: to display: to draw or to explain
in proper terms the figures, &c., in armorial bearings.--_n._ the science
or rules of coats-of-arms.--_ns._ BLAZ'ONER, one who blazons: a herald: a
slanderer; BLAZ'ONRY, the art of drawing or of deciphering coats-of-arms:
heraldry. [Fr. _blason_, a coat-of-arms, from root of BLAZE.]

BLEACH, bl[=e]ch, _v.t._ to make pale or white: to whiten, as textile
fabrics.--_v.i._ to grow white.--_ns._ BLEACH'ER, one who bleaches, or that
which bleaches; BLEACH'ERY, a place for bleaching; BLEACH'-FIELD, a place
for bleaching cloth: a bleacher's office or works; BLEACH'ING, the process
of whitening or decolourising cloth; BLEACH'ING-GREEN, a green for
bleaching clothes on; BLEACH'ING-POW'DER, chloride of lime. [A.S.
_bl['æ]can_, from root of BLEAK.]

BLEAK, bl[=e]k, _adj._ colourless: dull and cheerless: cold,
unsheltered.--_adv._ BLEAK'LY.--_n._ BLEAK'NESS. [A.S. _blæc_, _blâc_,
pale, shining; a different word from _blac_ (without accent), black. The
root is _blican_, to shine.]

BLEAK, bl[=e]k, _n._ a small white river-fish.

BLEAR, bl[=e]r, _adj._ (as in BLEAR-EYED, bl[=e]r'-[=i]d) sore or inflamed:
dim or blurred with inflammation. [Low Ger. _bleer-oged_, 'blear-eyed.']

BLEAT, bl[=e]t, _v.i._ to cry as a sheep.--_n._ the cry of a sheep, any
similar cry, even of the human voice.--_n._ BLEAT'ING, the cry of a sheep.
[A.S. _bl['æ]tan_; L. _bal[=a]re_, Gr. _bl[=e]ch[=e]_, a bleating; root
_bla-_; formed from the sound.]

BLEB, bleb, _n._ a transparent blister of the cuticle: a bubble, as in
water. [See BULB.]

BLED, bled, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BLEED.

BLEE, bl[=e], _n._ (_Mrs Browning_) complexion, colour. [A.S. _bléo_.]

BLEED, bl[=e]d, _v.i._ to lose blood: to die by slaughter: to issue forth
or drop as blood: to have money extorted from one: to feel great pity for,
as in the phrase, 'the heart bleeds:' to be as red as blood.--_v.t._ to
draw blood from, esp. surgically: to extort sums of money from:--_pa.t._
and _pa.p._ bled.--_n._ BLEED'ING, a discharge of blood: the operation of
letting blood.--_adj._ full of compassion: emitting sap: terribly weakened
by war: (_Shak._) bloody. [A.S. _blédan_. See BLOOD.]

BLEMISH, blem'ish, _n._ a stain or defect: reproach.--_v.t._ to mark with
any deformity: to tarnish: to defame.--_n._ BLEM'ISHMENT (_Spens._), the
state of being blemished, disgrace. [O. Fr. _blesmir_, _blemir_, pr.p.
_blemissant_, to stain, of dubious origin. Prof. Skeat thinks it Scand.,
Ice. _blâman_, livid colour--_blâr_, BLUE.]

BLENCH, blensh, _v.i._ to shrink or start back: to flinch. [From root of
BLINK.]

BLENCH, blensh, _adj._ or _adv._ based on the payment of a nominal yearly
duty.--Also BLANCH. [See BLANK.]

BLEND, blend, _v.t._ to mix together: to confound.--_v.i._ to be mingled or
mixed:--_pa.p._ blend'ed and blent.--_n._ a mixture:--_n._ BLEND'ING, the
act of mingling: the process by which the fusion of paints is effected.
[A.S. _blandan_.]

BLENDE, blend, _n._ native sulphuret of zinc. [Ger. _blenden_, to dazzle,
from the lustre of the crystals.]

BLENHEIM, blen'em, _n._ a kind of spaniel named from the Duke of
Marlborough's house.

BLENNORRHOEA, blen-no-r[=e]'a, _n._ discharge of mucus. [Gr. _blennos_,
mucus.]

BLENNY, blen'ni, _n._ a genus of acanthopterygious fishes, covered with
mucus or slimy matter. [Gr. _blennos_, mucus.]

BLENT, blent, (_obs._) _pa.p._ of BLEND--mixed: mingled: (_Spens._)
blinded, obscured.

BLESS, bles, _v.t._ to invoke a blessing upon: to make joyous, happy, or
prosperous: to consecrate by some religious rite, to cross one's self: to
extol as holy, to pronounce happy, to invoke the divine favour upon: to
wish happiness to: to praise or glorify:--_pa.p._ blessed (blest), or
blest.--_adj._ BLESS'ED, happy: prosperous: happy in heaven,
beatified.--_adv._ BLESS'EDLY.--_ns._ BLESS'EDNESS; BLESS'ING, a wish or
prayer for happiness or success: any means or cause of happiness: (_B._) a
gift or present: a form of invoking the favour of God at a meal.--_adv._
BLESS'INGLY.--SINGLE BLESSEDNESS, the celibate life, the unmarried state
generally. [A.S. _blétsian_, to bless, prob. from _blót_, sacrifice; the
word taken as--_benedic[)e]re_.]

BLESS, bles, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to brandish. [BLAZE(?).]

BLEST, blest, _pa.p._ of BLESS.

BLETHER, ble_th_'er, _v.i._ to talk garrulous nonsense.--_n._ fluent,
garrulous nonsense--also BLATH'ER.--_p.adj._ BLETH'ERING,
over-talkative.--_ns._ BLETH'ERSKATE, BLATH'ERSKITE (_Amer._), a
blustering, noisy, talkative fellow. [M. E. _blather_, of Scand. origin,
Ice. _blaðra_, to talk foolishly, _blaðr_, nonsense.]

BLEW, bl[=oo], _pa.t._ of BLOW.

BLEWITS, bl[=u]'its, _n._ a kind of mushroom. [Fr. BLUE.]

BLIGHT, bl[=i]t, _n._ a disease in plants, which blasts or withers them:
anything that injures or destroys.--_v.t._ to affect with blight: to blast:
to frustrate.--_p.adj._ BLIGHT'ING, withering, blasting. [Dr Murray notes
that it first appears in literature in the 17th century; prob. orig. of
Scand. origin; cf. Ice. _blettr_, a stain; perh. related to BLEACH, BLEAK.]

BLIN, blin, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to cease.--_n._ cessation: stoppage. [A.S.
_blinnan_, to cease, pfx. _be-_, and _linnan_, to cease.]

BLIND, bl[=i]nd, _adj._ without sight: dark: ignorant or undiscerning:
without an opening.--_n._ something to mislead: a window-screen: a
shade.--_v.t._ to make blind; to darken, obscure, or deceive; to
dazzle.--_pa.p._ bl[=i]nd'ed; _pr.p._ bl[=i]nd'ing.--_ns._ BLIND'AGE
(_mil._) a temporary wooden screen faced with earth as a protection against
splinters of shell and the like; BLIND'-COAL, non-bituminous coal.--_adj._
BLIND'ED, deprived of sight: without intellectual discernment.--_n._
BLIND'ER, one who or that which blinds; (_pl._) a horse's blinkers.--_adj._
BLIND'FOLD, having the eyes bandaged, so as not to see: thoughtless:
reckless.--_v.t._ to cover the eyes: to mislead.--_adj._ BLIND'ING, tending
to make blind.--_pr.p._ making blind.--_adv._ BLIND'LY.--_ns._ BLIND'NESS,
want of sight, ignorance, folly; BLIND'-SIDE, the side on which a person is
blind to danger: weak point; BLIND'WORM, a small reptile, like a snake,
having eyes so small as to be supposed blind.--BLIND-MAN'S BUFF, a game in
which one of the party is blindfolded and tries to catch the others. [A.S.
_blind_; Ice. _blindr_.]

BLINK, blingk, _v.i._ to glance, twinkle, or wink: to see obscurely, or
with the eyes half-closed: to shine unsteadily.--_v.t._ to shut out of
sight: to avoid or evade.--_n._ a glimpse, glance, or wink: a momentary
gleam of light, a spark.--_n._ BLINK'ARD, one who blinks or has bad
eyes.--_p.adj._ BLINKED, affected with blinking.--_n.pl._ BLINK'ERS, pieces
of leather fastened to the cheek-pieces of a horse's head-stall in driving
to prevent him seeing in any direction except straightforward. [M. E. a
variant of _blenk_, prob. the same as BLENCH (q.v.).]

BLIRT, blirt, _n._ (_Scot._) a fit of crying.--_v.i._ to burst into tears.
[Prob. the same as BLURT.]

BLISS, blis, _n._ the highest happiness: the special happiness of heaven,
heaven.--_adj._ BLISS'FUL.--_adv._ BLISS'FULLY.--_n._
BLISS'FULNESS.--_adj._ BLISS'LESS, without bliss. [A.S. _blíðs_, _blíðe_,
BLITHE.]

BLIST, blist, _pa.t._ (_Spens._) wounded: struck. [From Fr. _blesser_, to
wound.]

BLISTER, blis't[.e]r, _n._ a thin bubble or bladder on the skin, containing
watery matter: a pustule: a plaster applied to raise a blister.--_v.t._ to
raise a blister.--_ns._ BLIS'TER-BEE'TLE, BLIS'TER-FLY, the cantharis, or
Spanish fly, used for blistering; BLIS'TER-PLAS'TER, a plaster made of
Spanish flies used to raise a blister; BLIS'TER-STEEL, BLIS'TERED-STEEL,
steel blistered in the process of manufacture, used for making tools,
&c.--_adj._ BLIS'TERY. [M. E.; most prob. O. Fr. _blestre_, conn. with Old
Norse _blástr_, _blása_, to blow; Ger. _blase_.]

BLITHE, bl[=i]th, _adj._ happy: gay; sprightly.--_adv._ BLITHE'LY.--_n._
BLITHE'NESS.--_adj._ BLITHE'SOME, joyous.--_adv._ BLITHE'SOMELY.--_n._
BLITHE'SOMENESS. [A.S. _blíðe_, joyful. See BLISS.]

BLIVE, bl[=i]v, _adv._ (_Spens._). Same as BELIVE.

BLIZZARD, bliz'ard, _n._ a blinding storm of wind and snow, a
snow-squall.--_adjs._ BLIZZ'ARDLY, BLIZZ'ARDOUS. [A modern coinage--most
prob. onomatopoeic, on the analogy of _blow_, _blast_, &c.]

BLOAT, bl[=o]t, _v.t._ to swell or puff out: to dry by smoke (applied to
fish).--_v.i._ to swell or dilate: to grow turgid.--_p.adj._
BLOAT'ED.--_n._ BLOAT'ER, a herring partially dried in smoke, esp. at
Yarmouth. [Scand., as in Sw. _blöt_, soft.]

BLOB, blob, _n._ a drop of liquid: anything soft and round, like a
gooseberry: a round spot. [Imit.]

[Illustration]

BLOCK, blok, _n._ an unshaped mass of wood or stone, &c.: the wood on which
criminals were wont to be beheaded: (_mech._) a pulley together with its
framework; a piece of wood on which something is formed: a connected group
of houses: an obstruction: a blockhead.--_v.t._ to enclose or shut up: to
obstruct: to shape or sketch out roughly.--_n._ BLOCKADE', the blocking up
of a place by surrounding it with troops or by ships.--_v.t._ to block up
by troops or ships.--_ns._ BLOCK'-HEAD, one with a head like a block, a
stupid fellow; BLOCK'-HOUSE, a small temporary fort generally made of
logs.--_adj._ BLOCK'ISH, like a block: stupid: dull.--_ns._
BLOCK'-PRINT'ING, printing of BLOCK'-BOOKS, from engraved wooden blocks or
pages; BLOCK'-SHIP, a war-ship, inefficient for service in action on
account of age, but useful in defence of ports; BLOCK'-SYS'TEM, a system of
working trains in which no train is allowed on to a section of line so long
as any other train is on that section; BLOCK'-TIN, tin in the form of
blocks or ingots. [Widely spread, but acc. to Skeat, of Celt. origin, Gael.
_ploc_, Old Ir. _blog_, a fragment. See PLUG.]

BLOKE, bl[=o]k, _n._ a fellow, a man familiarly. [Ety. quite unknown--at
any rate not Gipsy.]

BLONCKET, blongk'et, _adj._ (_Spens._) gray. [Fr. _blanchet_, whitish, dim.
of _blanc_, white.]

BLONDE, blond, _n._ a person of fair complexion with light hair and blue
eyes--opp. to _Brunette_.--_adj._ of a fair complexion: fair. [Fr.]

BLOND-LACE, blond'-l[=a]s, _n._ lace made of silk, so called from its
colour.

BLONT, blont, _adj._ (_Spens._). Same as BLUNT.

BLOOD, blud, _n._ the red fluid in the arteries and veins of men and
animals: descent, of human beings, good birth: relationship, kindred:
elliptically for a blood-horse, one of good pedigree: a rake or swaggering
dandy about town: the blood-royal, as in 'princes of blood:' temperament:
bloodshed or murder: the juice of anything, esp. if red: the supposed seat
of passion--hence temper, anger, as in the phrase, 'his blood is up,' &c.:
the sensual nature of man.--_interj._ 'S BLOOD--God's blood.--_adjs._
BLOOD'-BESPOT'TED (_Shak._), spotted with blood; BLOOD'-BOLT'ERED
(_Shak._), sprinkled with blood as from a bolter or sieve; BLOOD'-BOUGHT,
bought at the expense of blood or life; BLOOD'-FROZ'EN (_Spens._), having
the blood frozen or chilled.--_ns._ BLOOD'GUILT'INESS, the guilt of
shedding blood, as in murder; BLOOD'HEAT, heat of the same degree as that
of the human blood (about 98° Fahr.); BLOOD'-HORSE, a horse of the purest
and most highly prized blood, origin, or stock.--_adj._ BLOOD'-HOT, as hot
or warm as blood.--_n._ BLOOD'HOUND, a large hound formerly employed in
tracing human beings: a blood-thirsty person.--_adv._ BLOOD'ILY.--_adj._
BLOOD'LESS, without blood, dead: without the shedding of blood: (_Shak._)
without spirit or activity.--_ns._ BLOOD'-LET'TING, the act of letting
blood, or bleeding by opening a vein; BLOOD'-MON'EY, money earned by laying
or supporting a capital charge against any one, esp. if the charge be false
or made by an accomplice; BLOOD'-POIS'ONING, a name popularly, but loosely,
used of pyæmia and allied diseases; BLOOD'-PUD'DING, a pudding made with
blood and other materials; BLOOD'-REL[=A]'TION, one related by blood or
marriage; BLOOD'-SAC'RIFICE (_Shak._), a sacrifice made with bloodshed;
BLOOD'SHED, the shedding of blood: slaughter.--_adjs._ BLOOD'SHOT (of the
eye), red or inflamed with blood; BLOOD'-SIZED, sized or smeared with
blood.--_n._ BLOOD'-SPAV'IN, a disease of horses consisting of the swelling
of a vein on the inside of the hock, from a checking of the blood.--_adj._
BLOOD'-STAINED, stained with blood: guilty of murder.--_ns._ BLOOD'-STONE,
a dark-green variety of quartz, variegated with blood-like spots of red
jasper, the heliotrope; a brown ore of iron, hematite; BLOOD'-SUCK'ER, an
animal that sucks blood, esp. a leech: an extortioner, one who sponges upon
another.--_adj._ BLOOD'-SUCK'ING (_Shak._), that sucks or draws
blood.--_ns._ BLOOD'-TAX, conscription or universal military service, as
drawing from the nation a certain number of lives or recruits annually;
BLOOD'-THIRST'INESS, thirst or desire for shedding blood.--_adj._
BLOOD'-THIRST'Y, having a thirst or desire to shed blood.--_ns._
BLOOD'-VES'SEL, a vessel in which blood circulates, a vein or artery;
BLOOD'-WORM, a small red earthworm used by anglers.--_adj._ BLOOD'Y, of the
nature of blood: stained with blood: murderous, cruel: vulgarly, as an
_adj._ emphasising anger or the like: as an _adv._ employed as a mere
intensive--most prob. from the habits of the 'bloods' about the beginning
of the 18th century (Etheredge, '_bloody_-drunk').--_v.t._ to make
bloody.--_n._ BLOOD'Y-BONES, a phrase, together with _Rawhead_, applied to
a children's bugbear.--_adjs._ BLOOD'Y-EYED; BLOOD'Y-FACED.--_ns._
BLOOD'Y-FLUX, dysentery, in which the discharges from the bowels are mixed
with blood; BLOOD'Y-HAND (_her._), the armorial device of Ulster, hence of
baronets.--_adj._ BLOOD'Y-MIND'ED.--_ns._ BLOOD'Y-MIND'EDNESS;
BLOOD'Y-SWEAT, a sweat accompanied with the discharge of blood.--AVENGER OF
BLOOD, the next-of-kin to a murdered man, whose duty it was to avenge his
death--the Hebrew _Goël_.--EATING OF BLOOD, prohibited under the Old
Testament dispensation, Jews still killing their own butcher-meat.--IN
BLOOD, in full vigour; IN HOT or COLD BLOOD, under or free from excitement
or sudden passion. [A.S. _blód_--root _blówan_, to bloom; cog. with Old.
Fris. _blód_, Ger. _blut_.]

BLOOM, bl[=oo]m, _v.i._ to put forth blossoms: to flower: to be in a state
of beauty or vigour: to flourish: to give a bloom or warm tint to
anything.--_n._ a blossom or flower: the opening of flowers: rosy colour:
the prime or highest perfection of anything: the first freshness of beauty
of anything: the flush or glow on the cheek--(_Spens._) BLOSME.--_p.adj._
BLOOM'ING, bright, shining, flourishing: (_slang_) full-blown.--_adjs._
BLOOM'LESS, without bloom; BLOOM'Y, flowery: flourishing. [Ice. _blóm_; cf.
Goth. _blôma_, Ger. _blume_.]

BLOOMER, bl[=oo]m'[.e]r, _n._ and _adj._ a dress for women, partly
resembling men's dress, devised by Mrs _Bloomer_ of New York about 1849,
consisting of a jacket with close sleeves, a skirt falling a little below
the knee, and a pair of Turkish trousers.

BLOOMERY, bl[=oo]m'[.e]r-i, _n._ the first forge through which iron passes
after it has been melted from the ore, and where it is made into BLOOMS, or
rough ingots, for hammering or drawing out.

BLORE, bl[=o]r, _n._ a violent gust of wind. [Prob. related to BLARE and
BLOW.]

BLOSME. See BLOOM.

BLOSSOM, blos'om, _n._ a flower-bud, the flower that precedes
fruit.--_v.i._ to put forth blossoms or flowers: to flourish and
prosper.--_n._ BLOSS'OMING.--_adj._ BLOSS'OMY, covered with flowers,
flowery. [A.S. _blóstm_, _blóstma_, from root of BLOOM.]

BLOT, blot, _n._ a spot or stain: an obliteration, as of something written:
a stain in reputation.--_v.t._ to spot or stain: to obliterate or destroy:
to disgrace: to dry writing with blotting-paper:--_pr.p._ blot'ting;
_pa.p._ blot'ted.--_n._ and _adj._ BLOT'TESQUE, a painting executed with
heavy blot-like touches, a daub or (_fig._) a vigorous descriptive
sketch.--_n._ BLOTTING-P[=A]'PER, unsized paper, used for absorbing
ink.--_adj._ BLOT'TY. [Prob. Scand., as in Dan. _plet_, Ice. _blettr_, a
spot.]

BLOT, blot, _n._ a piece liable to be taken at backgammon: a weak place in
anything. [Ety. obscure; Dut. _bloot_, naked.]

BLOTCH, bloch, _n._ a dark spot on the skin: a pustule.--_v.t._ to mark or
cover with blotches.--_adjs._ BLOTCHED, BLOTCH'Y. [Prob. formed on BLOT.]

BLOUSE, blowz, _n._ a loose sack-like outer garment, somewhat like the
English smock-frock. [Fr.]

BLOW, bl[=o], _n._ a stroke or knock: a sudden misfortune or calamity.--AT
A BLOW, by a single action, suddenly; TO COME TO BLOWS, TO EXCHANGE BLOWS,
to come to hostilities; WITHOUT STRIKING A BLOW, without a struggle. [A.S.
_bléowan_ is doubtful, cog. with Dut. _blouwen_, to dress (beat) flax, Ger.
_bl[=a]uen_, to beat hard. The noun appears in the 15th century without
evidence of parentage.]

BLOW, bl[=o], _v.i._ to bloom or blossom:--_pr.p._ bl[=o]w'ing; _pa.p._
bl[=o]wn. [A.S. _blówan;_ Ger. _blühen_. See BLOOM, BLOSSOM.]

BLOW, bl[=o], _v.i._ to produce a current of air: to move, as air or the
wind.--_v.t._ to drive air upon or into: to drive by a current of air, as
'to blow away, down,' &c.: to sound, as a wind-instrument: to breathe hard
or with difficulty: to spout, as whales: (_prov._) to boast: to spread by
report: to fan or kindle:--_pa.t._ blew (bl[=oo]); _pa.p._ blown
(bl[=o]n).--_ns._ BLOW'-BALL, the downy head of a dandelion in seed;
BLOW'ER, a metal plate put upon the upper part of a fireplace, so as to
increase the draught through the fire: a machine for driving a blast of
air, as into a furnace; BLOW'-FLY, or _Flesh-fly_, an insect of the order
Diptera, and of the large family Muscidæ, to which the common house-fly and
blue-bottle belong.--_p.adj._ BLOWN, out of breath, tired: swelled: stale,
worthless.--_n._ BLOW'PIPE, a pipe through which a current of air is blown
on a flame, to increase its heat: a kind of weapon much used by some of the
Indian tribes of South America both in hunting and war, consisting of a
long straight tube in which a small poisoned arrow is placed, and forcibly
expelled by the breath.--_adj._ BLOW'Y.--TO BLOW HOT AND COLD, to be
favourable and unfavourable by turns, to be irresolute; TO BLOW OFF (steam,
&c.), to allow to escape, to escape forcibly; TO BLOW ONE'S OWN TRUMPET, to
sound one's own praises; TO BLOW OVER, to pass away, to subside, as a
danger or a scandal; TO BLOW UP, to shatter or destroy by explosion: to
scold; TO BLOW UPON, to take the bloom, freshness, or the interest off
anything, to bring into discredit: to inform upon. [A.S. _bláwan_; Ger.
_blähen_, _blasen_; L. _flare_.]

BLOWZE, blowz, _n._ a ruddy, fat-faced wench.--_adjs._ BLOWZED, BLOWZ'Y,
fat and ruddy, or flushed with exercise, dishevelled, slatternly. [Perh.
related to root of BLUSH; or of cant origin.]

BLUBBER, blub'[.e]r, _n._ the fat of whales and other sea animals.--_v.i._
to weep effusively.--_p.adj._ BLUBB'ERED, of a face swollen with weeping.
[M. E. _blober_, _bluber_; most likely onomatopoeic]

BLUCHER, bl[=oo]ch'[.e]r, _n._ a strong leather half-boot or high shoe,
named from Marshal _Blücher_, the Prussian general at Waterloo.

BLUDGEON, blud'jun, _n._ a short stick with a heavy end to strike with.
[First in 18th century; origin very obscure; from a cant word conn. with
BLOOD.]

BLUE, bl[=oo], _n._ the colour of the sky when unclouded--hence the sea,
the sky, as in 'a bolt from the blue:' one of the seven primary
colours.--_adj._ of the colour blue: learned, pedantic: indecent or
obscene, as in _blue_ stories.--_ns._ BLUE'-BEARD, a monster who murders a
series of wives in Perrault's famous _conte_, before he is himself cut off:
one who is 'unfortunate' with his wives after the fashion of Henry VIII.;
BLUE'BELL, a plant that bears blue bell-shaped flowers; BLUE'-BIRD, a small
American bird akin to the warblers; BLUE'-BLACK, black with a tinge of
blue; BLUE'-BOOK, the name popularly applied to the reports and other
papers printed by parliament, because usually stitched up in blue paper
wrappers; BLUE'-BOT'TLE, a common name for the Blue Cornflower: a familiar
name for a policeman or beadle; BLUE'-CAP, a fish of the salmon kind with
blue spots on its head: the blue titmouse: (_Shak._) a Scotchman, from his
blue bonnet; BLUE'-EYE, a beautiful little bird in New South Wales, one or
the honey-eaters; BLUE'-FISH, a fish of the family Scomberidæ, abundant on
the east coast of North America.--_n.pl._ BLUE'-GOWNS, the name commonly
given to a former class of privileged mendicants in Scotland--called also
the _King's Bedesmen_.--_ns._ BLUE'-GRASS, a permanent grass found in
Europe and North America; BLUE'-GUM, a kind of Eucalyptus; BLUE'-JACK'ET, a
seaman in the navy, as distinguished from a marine; BLUE'-JAY, a common
North American bird of the [Illustration] jay family; BLUE'NESS;
BLUE'-NOSE, a nickname for a Nova Scotian; BLUE'-P[=E]'TER, a blue flag
with white square in the centre, used in the navy as a signal for sailing;
BLUE'PILL, a mercurial pill, used as a purgative in cases of torpid or
inflamed liver; BLUE'-STOCK'ING, a name given to learned ladies who display
their acquirements in a pedantic manner, to the neglect of womanly
graces--about 1750 Mrs Montague and others began to substitute literary
conversation for cards, and the name implying a disregard for the
conventional costume of polite society was suggested by the blue stockings
of Benjamin Stillingfleet--the French _bas bleu_ is a translation;
BLUE'-STONE, blue copperas, sulphate of copper; BLUE'-THROAT, or
BLUE'-BREAST, a beautiful and melodious bird, nearly allied to the
nightingale; BLUE'-WING, a kind of duck, either a sub-genus of Anas, or a
special genus Cyanopterus--the best-known species, the Common or Lunate
Blue-wing, the Blue-winged Teal of the United States.--_adj._ BL[=U]'ISH,
slightly blue.--BLUE BLOOD, aristocratic blood--the _sangre azul_ of the
Spanish hidalgoes; BLUE BONNET, a round flat cap of blue woollen, much worn
in Scotland: a blue-bonneted Scotch peasant or soldier; BLUE-BOTTLE FLY,
the meat-fly or blow-fly; BLUE-COAT BOY, a scholar of Christ's
Hospital--also (from the blue coat having formerly been the usual dress of
servants) a servant, beadle, soldier; BLUE DEVIL, an evil demon: (_pl._)
deep despondency, the apparitions seen in delirium tremens; BLUE FUNK
(_slang_), great terror; BLUE RIBBON, a term applied to any great prize, as
the Derby stakes--from the blue ribbon worn by Knights of the Garter: the
badge assumed by the so-called Blue Ribbon Army introduced from America in
1878; BLUE WATER, the deep sea, as opposed to port or a narrow
channel.--LIGHT BLUE, and DARK BLUE, the distinctive colours in their
athletic contests of Eton and Cambridge, and of Harrow and Oxford
respectively; THE BLUES, the Royal Horse Guards; THE BLUES (for blue
devils), a colloquial expression for depression of spirits.--TO BE A BLUE,
to be chosen to represent Oxford or Cambridge at an inter-university
contest in cricket, football, rowing, or athletics; AN OLD BLUE, one once
so chosen.--TO DRINK TILL ALL'S BLUE, until everything around one looks
blue; TO LOOK BLUE, to be down-spirited.--TRUE BLUE, faithful to the
principles of the political party wearing blue as its colour, in many
places identified with Conservative. [M. E. _blew_--O. Fr. _bleu_, of Teut.
origin; as also Scand. _blá_, which gave M. E. _bla_, _blo_, and modern
_blae_.]

BLUFF, bluf, _adj._ blustering: rough and hearty in manners: outspoken:
steep.--_n._ a high steep bank overlooking the sea or a river: the act of
bluffing at cards, as in poker--hence any kind of boastful swagger intended
to impose upon another: (_slang_) an excuse.--_adjs._ BLUFF'-BOWED, having
broad and flat bows, as a ship; BLUFF'-HEAD'ED, applied to a ship having
her stem too straight up.--_adv._ BLUFF'LY.--_n._ BLUFF'NESS. [Prob. Dut.]

BLUNDER, blun'der, _v.i._ to make a gross mistake, to flounder about: to
utter thoughtlessly.--_n._ a gross mistake.--_p.adj._ BLUN'DERING, apt to
make gross mistakes: apt to stumble.--TO BLUNDER AWAY, to throw away some
opportunity or advantage. [M. E. _blondren_; prob. conn. with BLAND; perh.
from Ice. _blunda_, to doze.]

BLUNDERBUSS, blun'd[.e]r-bus, _n._ a short hand-gun with a wide bore.
[Corr. of Dut. _donderbus_--_donder_, thunder, _bus_, a box, barrel of a
gun, a gun; Ger. _donnerbüchse_.]

BLUNT, blunt, _adj._ having a dull edge or point; rough, outspoken,
dull.--_v.t._ to dull the edge or point: to weaken.--_n._ (_slang_)
money.--_adj._ BLUNT'ISH.--_adv._ BLUNTLY.--_n._ BLUNT'NESS.--_adj._
BLUNT'-WIT'TED (_Shak._) dull, stupid. [Orig. sleepy, dull; prob. conn.
with Ice. _blunda_, to doze; perh. akin to BLIND.]

BLUR, blur, _n._ a blot, stain, or spot.--_v.t._ to blot, stain, obscure,
or blemish (with _out_, _over_):--_pr.p._ blur'ring; _pa.p._ blurred. [A
variety of BLEAR.]

BLURT, blurt, _v.t._ to utter suddenly or unadvisedly (with _out_).--_n._
an abrupt outburst.--_p.adj._ BLURT'ING, impulsively frank. [From sound.
Cf. BLIRT.]

BLUSH, blush, _n._ a red glow on the face caused by shame, modesty, &c.:
any reddish colour: sudden appearance.--_v.i._ to show shame or confusion
by growing red in the face: to grow red.--_n._ BLUSH'ET (_Ben Jonson_), a
young, modest girl.--_adj._ BLUSH'FUL, full of blushes: modest--_n._
BLUSH'ING, the act of turning red: the appearance of colour upon the
cheek.--_p.adj._ showing blushes: modest.--_adv._ BLUSH'INGLY.--AT THE
FIRST BLUSH, at the first glance.--TO PUT TO THE BLUSH, to cause to blush.
[Prob. Scand.; cog. with A.S. _blysa_, a blaze. See BLAZE, BLOWZE.]

BLUSTER, blus't[.e]r, _v.i._ to make a noise like a blast of wind: to bully
or swagger.--_n._ a blast or roaring as of the wind: bullying or boasting
language: a storm of anger.--_n._ BLUS'TERING, a noisy blowing as of a
blast: swaggering: noisy pretension.--_adj._ stormy: tumultuous:
boastful.--_adv._ BLUS'TERINGLY.--_adjs._ BLUS'TEROUS (_Shak._) noisy:
boastful; BLUS'TERY, stormy: (_Carlyle_) swaggering. [An augmentative of
BLAST.]

BO, b[=o], _interj._ a word used to frighten children.--TO SAY BO TO A
GOOSE, to open the mouth, to say even a word.

BOA, b[=o]'a, _n._ a genus of serpents which includes the largest species
of serpents (the BOA-CONSTRIC'TOR), which kill their prey by constriction
or pressure: a long serpent-like coil of fur, feathers, or the like, worn
round the neck by ladies. [Perh. conn. with L. _bos_, an ox.]

BOAD. Same as ABODE, _pa.p._ of ABIDE: also the same as BODE.

BOANERGES, bo-an-erj'es, _n._ a noisy preacher or shouting orator. ['Sons
of thunder'--Mark, iii. 17.]

BOAR, b[=o]r, _n._ the male of swine, or its flesh.--_adj._ BOAR'ISH,
swinish: brutal.--_n._ BOAR'-SPEAR, a spear used in boar-hunting. [A.S.
_bár_; Dut. _beer_; Ger. _bär_.]

BOARD, b[=o]rd, _n._ a broad and thin strip of timber: a table to put food
on: food: a table round which persons meet for some kind of business: any
council or authorised body of men, as a 'school-board:' the deck of a ship:
(_pl._) the stage: a kind of thick stiff paper, as in pasteboard,
Bristol-board, esp. that used in the binding of books.--_v.t._ to cover
with boards: to supply with food at fixed terms: to enter a ship: to
attack.--_v.i._ to receive food or take meals.--_ns._ BOARD'ER, one who
receives board (food): one who boards a ship; BOARD'ING, the act of
covering with boards: the covering itself: act of boarding a ship;
BOARD'ING-HOUSE, a house where boarders are kept; BOARD'ING-PIKE, a pike
used in boarding a ship, or in defending it when attacked;
BOARD'ING-SCHOOL, a school in which board is given as well as instruction;
BOARD'-SCHOOL, a school under control of a school-board, as elected by the
Elementary Education Act of 1870.--_n.pl._ BOARD'-W[=A]'GES, wages allowed
to servants to keep themselves in food.--ABOVE BOARD, openly.--BY THE
BOARD, over the board or side of a ship--hence, TO GO BY THE BOARD, to be
lost or destroyed.--TO SWEEP THE BOARD, to take all the cards. [A.S.
_bord_, a board, the side of a ship; Ice. _borð_, the side of a ship: conn.
either with BEAR or with BROAD.]

BOAST, b[=o]st, _v.i._ to talk vaingloriously: to brag (with _of_),--_v.t._
to brag of: speak proudly or confidently of, esp. justifiably: to magnify
or exalt one's self.--_n._ an expression of pride: a brag: the cause of
boasting.--_adj._ BOAST'FUL, given to brag.--_adv._ BOAST'FULLY.--_ns._
BOAST'FULNESS, BOAST'ING, ostentatious display: vaunting.--_adj._
BOAST'LESS, without boasting; simple, unostentatious. [M. E. _bost_, of
doubtful origin; apparently W. _bostio_, Gael. _bòsd_, a bragging, are
borrowed.]

BOAT, b[=o]t, _n._ a small open vessel usually moved by oars: a small ship:
a vessel like a boat in shape, as a 'sauce-boat.'--_v.i._ to sail about in
a boat.--_ns._ BOAT'-HOOK, an iron hook fixed to a pole used for pulling or
pushing off a boat; BOAT'-HOUSE, a house or shed for a boat: BOAT'ING, the
art or practice of sailing in boats; BOAT'MAN, a man who has charge of a
boat: a rower.--IN THE SAME BOAT, in the same circumstances.--TO HAVE AN
OAR IN ANOTHER'S BOAT, to meddle with the affairs of others. [A.S. _bát;_
Dut. _boot_; Fr. _bateau_.]

BOATSWAIN, b[=o]t'sw[=a]n (_colloq._ b[=o]'sn), _n._ a petty officer on
board ship who looks after the boats, rigging, &c., and calls the seamen to
duty with a whistle. [BOAT, and _swain_, Scand. _sveinn_, a boy.]

BOB, bob, _v.i._ to move quickly up and down, to dangle: to fish with a
bob.--_v.t._ to move in a short, jerking manner:--_pr.p._ bob'bing; _pa.p._
bobbed.--_n._ a short jerking motion: a slight blow: anything that moves
with a bob or swing: a pendant: a knot of hair, as in BOB'-WIG, one with
the ends turned up into short curls: a bunch of lobworms, used in catching
eels: any small roundish body: the refrain or burden of a song: a term in
bell-ringing--a BOB MINOR is rung upon six bells; a BOB MAJOR on eight; a
BOB ROYAL on ten; a BOB MAXIMUS on twelve.--_adj._ BOB'BISH, in good
spirits.--_n._ BOB'BLE, the movement of water in commotion. [Perh. Celt.,
Gael. _baban_, _babag_.]

BOB, bob, _n._ (_slang_) a shilling. [Hardly the O. Fr. _bobe_ = 1½d.]

BOB, bob, BOBBY, bob'i, _n._ a shortened familiar form of _Robert_: a
familiar name for a policeman--from Sir Robert Peel, Home Secretary at the
passing of the Metropolitan Police Act of 1828.--_n._ LIGHT'-BOB, a soldier
of the light infantry.

BOBADIL, bob'a-dil, _n._ a swaggering boaster, from Ben Jonson's _Every Man
in his Humour_.

BOBBERY, bob'er-i, _n._ a noisy row. [Hindi _b[=a]p re!_ O father!--_Col.
Yule_.]

BOBBIN, bob'in, _n._ a small piece of wood on which thread is wound.--_n._
BOBB'INET, a kind of fine netted lace made by machines. [Fr. _bobine_,
prob. Celt.; cf. Gael. _baban_, a tassel.]

BOBOLINK, bob'[=o]-lingk, _n._ a North American singing bird, found in the
northern states in spring and summer. [At first _Bob Lincoln_, from the
note of the bird.]

BOBSTAYS, bob'st[=a]z, _n.pl._ (_naut._) ropes or stays used to confine the
bowsprit downward to the stem or cutwater, and counteract the strain of the
foremast-stays.

BOBTAIL, bob't[=a]l, _n._ a short or cut tail: a word applied in contempt
to the rabble, as in 'tag-rag and _bobtail_.'--_adj._ BOB'TAILED, with tail
cut short.

BOCAGE. See BOSCAGE.

BODE, b[=o]d, _v.t._ to portend or prophesy.--_v.i._ to be an omen: to
foreshow.--_adj._ BODE'FUL, boding, ominous.--_n._ BODE'MENT, an omen,
presentiment.--_pr.p._ BOD'ING, presaging.--_n._ an omen or portent. [A.S.
_bodian_, to announce--_bod_, a message; allied to BID.]

BODE, b[=o]d (_Spens._). Same as ABODE.

BODEGA, bo-d[=e]'ga, _n._ a wine-shop. [Sp.]

BODGE, boj, _v.i._ to make bad work, to fail.--_n._ BODG'ER, a botcher, a
pedlar. [A form of BOTCH.]

BODICE, bod'is, _n._ a woman's outer garment covering the waist and bust:
the close-fitting waist or body of a woman's gown.

BODIKIN, bod'i-kin, _n._ a form of an oath, ''Od's bodikins' = God's little
body.

BODKIN, bod'kin, _n._ a small dagger: a small instrument for pricking holes
or for dressing the hair: a large blunt needle.--TO SIT, or RIDE, BODKIN,
to be wedged in tight between two others. [Prob. conn. with W. _bidog_, a
dagger.]

BODLE, bod'l, _n._ a Scotch copper coin, equal to about one-sixth of an
English penny, the smallest coin. [Said to be named from a mint-master, one
_Bothwell_.]

BODRAGES, bod'r[=a]-jiz, _n.pl._ (_Spens._) a hostile attack, a raid. [Ir.
_buaidhreadh_, a disturbance.]

BODY, bod'i, _n._ the whole frame of a man or lower animal: the main part
of an animal, as distinguished from the limbs: the main or middle part of
anything: matter, as opposed to spirit: substance or substantial quality: a
mass: a person: a number of persons united by some common tie.--_v.t._ to
give form to: to embody:--_pr.p._ bod'ying; _pa.p._ bod'ied.--_adj._
BOD'ILESS, without a body: incorporeal.--_adv._ BOD'ILY, relating to the
body, esp. as opposed to the mind.--_ns._ BOD'Y-COL'OUR, a term applied to
paints to express their degree of consistence, substance, and tingeing
power; BOD'Y-CUR'ER (_Shak._), a doctor; BOD'YGUARD, a guard to protect the
person, esp. of the sovereign; BOD'Y-POL'ITIC, the collective body of the
people in its political capacity; BOD'Y SERV'ANT, a personal attendant;
BOD'Y-SNATCH'ER, one who secretly disinters the bodies of the dead for the
purposes of dissection. [A.S. _bodig_, of dubious origin.]

BOEOTIAN, be-[=o]'shyan, _adj._ pertaining to _Boeotia_ in Greece, noted
for the dullness of its inhabitants--hence stupid, dull.

BOER, b[=oo]r, _n._ a Dutch colonist at the Cape engaged in agriculture.
[Dut. _boer_. See BOOR.]

BOG, bog, _n._ soft ground: a marsh or quagmire.--_v.t._ to sink or to
entangle.--_n._ BOG'-BUTT'ER, a mineral substance, resembling butter, found
in Irish bogs.--_adj._ BOGG'Y.--_ns._ BOG'LET, BOG'LAND; BOG'-MOSS, a genus
of moss plants; BOG'-OAK, trunks of oak embedded in bogs and preserved from
decay--of a deep black colour, often used for making ornaments; BOG'-ORE, a
kind of iron ore found in boggy land; BOG'-SPAV'IN, a lesion of the
hock-joint of the horse, consisting in distension of the capsule enclosing
the joint, usually arising suddenly from a sprain in action; BOG'-TROT'TER,
one who lives in a boggy country, hence an Irishman. [Ir. _bogach_; Gael.
_bog_, soft.]

BOGGARD, BOGGART. See BOGLE.

BOGGLE, bog'l, _v.i._ to stop or hesitate as if at a bogle: to start with
fright: to make difficulties about a thing: to equivocate.--_n._ a scruple,
objection: a bungle.--_n._ BOGG'LER, one who boggles: a doubter: (_Shak._)
one who starts from the right path. [See BOGLE.]

BOGIE, BOGEY, b[=o]g'i, _n._ a low truck on four wheels, so constructed as
to turn easily, a trolly: a revolving under-carriage, as in a locomotive
engine. [Ety. unknown; perh. conn. with BOGY, a fiend.]

BOGLE, b[=o]g'l, _n._ a spectre or goblin: a scarecrow: a bugbear, or
source of terror--also BOGG'LE.--BOGG'ARD is a common form in the North
country. [Scot. _bogle_, a ghost; W. _bwg_, a goblin. See BUG.]

BOGUS, b[=o]'gus, _adj._ counterfeit, spurious. [An American cant word, of
very doubtful origin--it may possibly be ult. related to BOGY.]

BOGY, BOGEY, b[=o]g'i, _n._ a goblin: a bugbear or special object of dread,
the devil.--_n._ BOG'YISM. [A form of BOGGLE and BOGGARD.]

BOHEA, bo-h[=e]', _n._ the lowest quality of black tea: tea generally.
[Chin.]

BOHEMIAN, bo-h[=e]'mi-an, _n._ and _adj._ applied to persons of loose or
irregular habits: an artist or man of letters, or indeed any one, who sets
social conventionalities aside.--_n._ BOH[=E]'MIANISM. [Fr. _bohémien_, a
gipsy, from the belief that these wanderers came from _Bohemia_.]

BOIAR. Same as BOYAR.

BOIL, boil, _v.i._ to bubble up from the action of heat: to be hot: to be
excited or agitated.--_v.t._ to heat to a boiling state: to cook or dress
by boiling.--_ns._ BOIL'ER, one who boils: that in which anything is
boiled: a vessel in which steam, usually for a steam-engine, is generated:
a vessel for heating water for baths, &c.; BOIL'ING, the bubbling up of any
liquid by the application of heat: the act of dressing food by boiling
water.--_adj._ bubbling: swelling with heat or passion.--_n._
BOIL'ING-POINT, the temperature at which liquids begin to boil under
heat.--TO BOIL DOWN, to reduce in bulk by boiling, to extract the substance
of, to epitomise; TO BOIL OVER, to bubble over the sides of the containing
vessel, to break out into unrestrained indignation. [O. Fr. _boillir_--L.
_bull[=i]re_--_bulla_, a bubble.]

BOIL, boil, _n._ an inflamed swelling or tumour. [A.S. _býl_; Ger.
_beule_.]

BOISTEROUS, bois't[.e]r-us, _adj._ wild: noisy: turbulent: stormy.--_adv._
BOIS'TEROUSLY.--_n._ BOIS'TEROUSNESS. [M. E. _boistous_, approximating, but
not in sense, to the O. Fr. _boisteus_, whence modern _boiteux_, lame. The
Celtic words throw no light upon its origin.]

BOLAS, b[=o]'las, _n._ missiles used by the South American _gauchos_,
consisting of balls or stones strung together, swung round the head and
hurled, usually so as to entangle the legs of an animal running. [Sp.]

BOLD, b[=o]ld, _adj._ daring or courageous: forward or impudent:
presumptuous: executed with spirit: striking to the sight, well marked:
steep or abrupt.--_v.t._ BOLD'EN (_obs._), to make bold.--_adj._
BOLD'FACED, impudent.--_adv._ BOLD'LY.--_n._ BOLD'NESS.--TO MAKE BOLD, to
take the liberty, to make free. [A.S. _bald_; Old High Ger. _bald_, Ice.
_ballr_.]

BOLE, b[=o]l, _n._ the round stem or body of a tree. [Scand. _bolr_; Ger.
_bohle_, a plank.]

BOLE, b[=o]l, _n._ an earthy mineral resembling clay in structure, and
consisting essentially of silica, alumina, red oxide of iron, and water;
the bole of Lemnos, _Lemnian Earth_, is red in colour, and was once used as
a tonic and astringent medicine. [Gr. _b[=o]los_, a clod.]

BOLE, b[=o]l, _n._ a recess in a wall: an opening to admit light and air.
[Scot.; origin unknown.]

BOLERO, bo-l[=a]'ro, or bo-l[=e]'ro, _n._ Spanish national dance: also the
air to which it is danced. [Sp.]

BOLETUS, bol-[=e]'tus, _n._ a genus of fungi, having a pore-like surface
occupying the place of gills. [Gr. _b[=o]lit[=e]s_, mushroom.]

BOLIDE, bol'[=i]d, _n._ a large meteor or fireball. [Fr.--L. _bolid-em_,
_bolis_--Gr. _bolis_, _ballein_, to throw.]

BOLIN, an obsolete form of BOWLINE.

BOLL, b[=o]l, _n._ one of the round heads or seed-vessels of flax, poppy,
&c.: a pod or capsule.--_p.adjs._ BOLLED (b[=o]ld), swollen, podded; BOLLEN
(b[=o]ln), swollen (_Shak._). [A form of BOWL; A.S. _bolla_.]

BOLL, b[=o]l, _n._ a measure of capacity for grain, &c., used in Scotland
and the north of England--in Scotland = 6 imperial bushels; in England,
varying from 2 to 6 bushels: also a measure of weight, containing, for
flour, 140 lb. [Scot. _bow_; prob. a Scand. word; cf. Ice. _bolli_.]

BOLLANDIST, bol'an-dist, _n._ one of the Jesuit writers who continued the
_Acta Sanctorum_ (q.v.), begun by John _Bolland_ (1596-1665).

BOLLARD, bol'ard, _n._ a post on a wharf to which vessels are secured: a
thick piece of wood on the forepart of a whale-boat, round which the line
is turned when a whale is harpooned. [Prob. BOLE.]

BOLOGNA, bol-[=o]n'ya, _adj._ from a town of Italy, which gives its name to
Bologna phial, Bologna phosphorus, and Bologna or 'Polony'
sausages.--_adj_. BOLOGN'ESE.

BOLOMETER, b[=o]-lom'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring minute
amounts of radiant heat. [Gr. _bol[=e]_, ray (_ballein_, to throw),
_metron_, a measure.]

BOLSTER, b[=o]l'st[.e]r, _n._ a long round pillow or cushion: a pad:
anything resembling it in form or use, esp. any piece of mechanism
affording a support against pressure.--_v.t._ to support with a bolster: to
hold up.--_p.adj._ BOL'STERED, supported: swelled out.--_n._ BOL'STERING, a
propping up or supporting. [A.S. _bolster_; from root of BOWL.]

BOLT, b[=o]lt, _n._ a bar or pin used to fasten a door, &c.: an arrow: a
thunderbolt, as in 'a bolt from the blue.'--_v.t._ to fasten with a bolt:
to throw or utter precipitately: to expel suddenly: to swallow
hastily.--_v.i._ to rush away (like a bolt from a bow): to start up:
(_U.S._) to break away from one's political party.--_ns._ BOLT'-HEAD, the
head of a bolt: a chemical flask; BOLT'-ROPE, a rope sewed all round the
edge of a sail to prevent it from tearing; BOLT'SPRIT (same as
BOWSPRIT).--_adv._ BOLT'-UP'RIGHT, upright and straight as a bolt or
arrow.--_n._ BOLT'-UP'RIGHTNESS. [A.S. _bolt_; Old High Ger. _bolz_.]

BOLT, b[=o]lt, _v.t._ (better spelling, BOULT), to sift, to separate the
bran from, as flour: to examine by sifting: to sift through coarse
cloth.--_ns._ BOLT'ER, a sieve: a machine for separating bran from flour;
BOLT'ING, the process by which anything is bolted or sifted;
BOLT'ING-HUTCH, a hutch or large box into which flour falls when it is
bolted. [O. Fr. _bulter_, or _buleter_ = _bureter_, from _bure_--Low L.
_burra_, a coarse reddish-brown cloth--Gr. _pyrros_, reddish.]

BOLUS, b[=o]'lus, _n._ a rounded mass of anything: a large pill. [L.
_bolus_--Gr. _b[=o]los_, a lump.]

BOMB, bom, or bum, _n._ a hollow projectile, usually of cast-iron, fired
from a mortar, filled with gunpowder and fitted with a time-fuse: any
similar missile or case of explosives, as a dynamite bomb.--_n._ BOM'BARD,
an engine or great gun for throwing bombs: (_Shak._) a barrel or large
vessel for holding liquor.--_v.t._ BOMBARD', to attack with bombs.--_ns._
BOMBARDIER', the lowest non-commissioned officer in the British artillery,
formerly a man employed about the mortars and howitzers; BOMBARD'MENT;
BOMBAR'DON, a deep-toned brass instrument, with a tube likened to a
bombard.--_adj._ BOMB'-PROOF, proof or secure against the force of
bombs.--_ns._ BOMB'-SHELL (same as BOMB); BOMB'-VESS'EL, BOMB'-KETCH, a
vessel for carrying the mortars used in bombarding from the
sea.--BOMBARDIER BEETLE, a name given to several species of beetles, which
discharge an acrid volatile fluid with explosive force from the abdomen.
[Fr. _bombe_--L. _bombus_--Gr. _bombos_, a humming sound--an imitative
word.]

BOMBASINE, BOMBAZINE, bom'-, bum-ba-z[=e]n', _n._ a twilled or corded
fabric of silk and worsted, or of cotton and worsted.--_n._ BOM'BAX, a
genus of silk-cotton trees, native to tropical America. [Fr.
_bombasin_--Low L. _bombasinum_--Gr. _bombyx_, silk.]

BOMBAST, bom'-, bum'bast, _n._ inflated or high-sounding language:
originally cotton or any soft material used for stuffing garments.--_adj._
BOMBAS'TIC, high-sounding: inflated. [Low L. _bombax_, cotton--Gr.
_bombyx_, silk.]

BOMBAX. See BOMBASINE.

BOMBAY-DUCK, bom-b[=a]'-duk, _n._ a fish of the family Scopelidæ, nearly
allied to the salmon and trout family, which is salted, dried, and eaten as
a relish.

BOMBYX, bom'biks, _n._ the silkworm. [Gr.]

BON, bong, _adj._ good--French, occurring in some English but not
Anglicised phrases, as BON ACCORD, good-will, agreement; BON MOT, a jest or
smart saying; BON TON, good style, the fashionable world; BON VIVANT, one
who lives well or luxuriously.

BONA FIDE, b[=o]'na f[=i]d'[=a], _adv._ and _adj._ in good faith, with
sincerity, genuine. [L.]

BONANZA, bon-an'za, _n._ a term common in the Pacific States for a rich
mass of gold: any mine of wealth or stroke of luck. [Sp.]

BONAPARTISM, b[=o]'na-pärt-izm, _n._ attachment to the dynasty of Napoleon
_Bonaparte_, Emperor of the French.--_n._ B[=O]'NAPARTIST.

BONA-ROBA, b[=o]'na-r[=o]'ba, _n._ (_Shak._) a showy wanton, a courtesan.
[It. _buona roba_, lit. a fine gown.]

BONBON, bong'bong, _n._ a sweetmeat.--_n._ BONBON'IERE, a fancy box for
holding such. [Fr., 'very good'--_bon_, good.]

[Illustration]

BOND, bond, _n._ that which binds, a band: link of connection or union: a
writing of obligation to pay a sum or to perform a contract: any
constraining or any cementing force: in building, the connection of one
stone or brick with another, made by lapping the one over the other as the
work is carried up, as in ENGLISH BOND, FLEMISH BOND, &c.: (_pl._)
imprisonment, captivity.--_adj._ bound: in a state of servitude.--_v.t._ to
put imported goods in the customs' warehouses till the duties on them are
paid--hence BONDED STORES or WAREHOUSES, TO TAKE OUT OF BOND, &c.--_p.adj._
BOND'ED, secured by bond, as duties.--_ns._ BOND'ER, a binding stone or
brick; BOND'-HOLD'ER, a person who holds bonds of a private person or
public company; BOND'ING, that arrangement by which goods remain in the
customs' warehouses till the duties are paid; BOND'MAID, BOND'WOMAN,
BONDS'WOMAN, a woman-slave; BOND'MAN, a man-slave; BOND'MANSHIP;
BOND'SERV'ANT, a slave; BOND'-SERV'ICE, the condition of a bond-servant:
slavery; BOND'-SLAVE, a slave; BONDS'MAN, a bondman or slave: a surety;
BOND'-STONE, a stone which reaches a considerable distance into or entirely
through a wall for the purpose of binding it together; BOND'-TIM'BER,
timber built into a wall as it is carried up for the purpose of binding it
together in a longitudinal direction.--BONDED DEBT, the debt of a
corporation represented by the bonds it has issued, as contrasted with its
_floating_ debt. [A variant of _band_--A.S. _bindan_, to bind.]

BONDAGE, bond'[=a]j, _n._ state of being bound: captivity: slavery.--_n._
BOND'AGER, a female outworker in the Border and North country, whom the
_hind_ or married cottar was bound to provide for the farm-work. [O. Fr.;
Low L. _bondagium_, a kind of tenure. Acc. to Skeat, this is from A.S.
_bonda_, a boor, a householder, from Ice. _bóndi_ = _búandi_, a tiller, a
husbandman, _búa_, to till, cog. with A.S. _búan_.]

BONE, b[=o]n, _n._ a hard substance forming the skeleton of mammalian
animals: a piece of the skeleton of an animal: (_pl._) the bones
collectively: mortal remains: pieces of bone held between the fingers of
the hand and rattled together to keep time to music: dice, as made of bone,
ivory, &c.--_v.t._ to take the bones out of, as meat: to seize, to
steal.--_ns._ BONE'-ACHE (_Shak._), aching or pain in the bones; BONE'-ASH,
BONE'-EARTH, the remains when bones are burnt in an open furnace;
BONE'-BLACK, the remains when bones are heated in a close vessel.--_adj._
BONED--used in composition, as high-boned: having bones: having the bones
removed.--_ns._ BONE'-DUST, ground or pulverised bones, used in
agriculture; BONE'-LACE, lace woven with bobbins, which were frequently
made of bone.--_adj._ BONE'LESS, wanting bones.--_ns._ BONE'-SET'TER, one
who treats broken bones without being a duly qualified surgeon;
BONE'-SH[=A]K'ER, a name familiarly given to the earlier forms of bicycle
before india-rubber tires; BONE'-SPAV'IN, a bony excrescence or hard
swelling on the inside of the hock of a horse.--_adj._ BON'Y, full of, or
consisting of, bones.--A BONE OF CONTENTION, something that causes strife;
A BONE TO PICK, something to occupy one, a difficulty, a grievance,
controversy, dispute.--TO MAKE NO BONES OF, to have no scruples in regard
to something; TO THE BONE, to the inmost part. [A.S. _bán_, Ger. _bein_.]

BONFIRE, bon'f[=i]r, _n._ a large fire in the open air on occasions of
public rejoicing, &c.--originally a fire in which bones were burnt. [Not
Fr. _bon_, good, and FIRE.]

BONGRACE, bon'gr[=a]s, _n._ a shade from the sun once worn by women on the
front of the bonnet: a broad-brimmed hat or bonnet. [Fr.]

BONHOMIE, bon'o-m[=e], _n._ easy good-nature. [Fr.; _bon homme_, a good
fellow.]

BONIFACE, bon'i-f[=a]s, _n._ a generic name for an innkeeper, like 'mine
host' or 'landlord'--from the hearty _Boniface_ of Farquhar's _Beaux'
Stratagem_.

BONING, b[=o]n'ing, _n._ the act of estimating straightness by looking
along a series of poles, as in _boning-rod_ or _telescope_.

BONITO, bo-n[=e]to, _n._ a name given to several fishes of the mackerel
family--the Stripe-bellied Tunny of the tropical parts of the Atlantic and
Pacific; the Mediterranean Bonito; the Plain Bonito. [Sp.]

BONNE, bon, _n._ a French nursemaid. [Fr.; _fem._ of _bon_, good.]

BONNE-BOUCHE, bon-b[=oo]sh, _n._ a delicious morsel. [Fr.]

BONNET, bon'et, _n._ a covering for the head worn by women, without a brim,
tied on by strings, and now letting the whole face be seen, although
formerly a bonnet (esp. a POKE'-BONN'ET) covered the sides of the face: a
soft cap: the velvet cap within a coronet: (_fort._) a small work before
the salient or flanked angle of the ravelin: (_naut._) an additional part
laced to the foot of jibs, or other fore-and-aft sails, to gather more
wind: a wire-covering over a chimney-top: a decoy or pretended player or
bidder at a gaming-table or an auction, the accomplice of a thimble-rigger
or other petty swindler.--_v.t._ to put a bonnet on: to crush a man's hat
over his eyes.--_adj._ and _p.adj._ BONN'ETED.--_ns._ BONN'ET-PIECE, a gold
coin of James V. of Scotland, on which the king wears a bonnet instead of a
crown; BONN'ET-ROUGE, the red cap of liberty of the French Revolution,
shaped like a nightcap.--BONNET LAIRD, a Scotch name for a petty landowner
who wore a bonnet, not the hat of the gentry.--BALMORAL BONNET, a flat cap
resembling the Scotch (Lowland) bonnet; GLENGARRY BONNET, rising to a point
in front, with ribbons hanging down behind; SCOTCH BONNET, of a broad,
round, flat shape, of dark-blue colour, with a tuft on the top, the fabric
thick-milled woollen, without seam or lining--like the Basque _béret_. [O.
Fr.--Low L. _bonnetum_, orig. the name of a stuff.]

BONNY, bon'i, _adj._ beautiful: handsome: gay: plump: pleasant-looking: as
a general term expressing appreciation = considerable, &c., often
ironically: cheerful: (_Shak._) stout, strong.--_adv._ BONN'ILY,
beautifully: gaily.--_n._ BONN'INESS, handsomeness: gaiety. [Fr. _bon_,
_bonne_--L. _bonus_.]

BONSPIEL, bon'sp[=e]l, _n._ a great curling-match. [Dr Murray suggests an
assumed Dut. _bondspel_, from _bond_ = _verbond_, 'covenant, alliance,
compact,' and; _spel_, play; the word having entered Scotch as a whole,
_spiel_, _spel_, having never been in common use for 'play.']

BONUS, b[=o]n'us, _n._ a premium beyond the usual interest for a loan: an
extra dividend to shareholders: an extra gratuity paid to workmen: a
douceur or bribe. [L. _bonus_, good.]

BONZE, bon'ze, _n._ a Buddhist priest. [Jap. _bonzó_ or _bonzi_, a priest.]

BOO, BOOH, b[=oo], _interj._ a sound expressive of disapprobation or
contempt.--_v.i._ to utter 'boo!' to hoot.--_v.t._ BOO'-HOO', to weep
noisily.

BOOBY, b[=oo]'bi, _n._ a silly or stupid fellow: a sea-bird, of the gannet
tribe, remarkable for its apparent stupidity in allowing itself to be
knocked down with a stick.--_adjs._ BOO'BY, BOO'BYISH, like a booby:
stupid.--_ns._ BOO'BYISM; BOO'BY-TRAP, a rude form of practical joke among
boys, by which something is made to fall upon some one entering a door, or
the like. [Sp. _bobo_, a dolt: may prob. be cog. with Ger. _bube_.]

BOODLE, b[=oo]d'l, _n._ a crowd, pack--'the whole boodle:' stock-in-trade,
capital. [May be conn. with Dut. _boedel_.]

BOODLE, b[=oo]d'l, _n._ (_slang_) a stupid noodle.

BOODY, b[=oo]d'i, _v.i._ to sulk or mope. [Fr. _bouder_, to pout.]

BOOK, book, _n._ a collection of sheets of paper bound together, either
printed, written on, or blank: a literary composition: a division of a
volume or subject: the Bible: a betting-book, or record of bets made with
different people: (_fig._) any source of instruction: the libretto of an
opera, &c.: (_pl._) formal accounts of transactions, as minutes of
meetings, records kept of his business by a merchant.--_v.t._ to write in a
book.--_ns._ BOOK'-ACCOUNT', an account of debt or credit in a book;
BOOK'BINDER, one who binds books; BOOK'BINDING, the art or practice of
binding or putting the boards on books; BOOK'-CASE, a case with shelves for
books; BOOK'-CLUB, an association of persons who buy new books for
circulation among themselves; BOOK'-DEBT, a debt for articles charged by
the seller in his book-account.--_adj._ BOOK'FUL, full of information
gathered from books.--_ns._ BOOK'-HOLD'ER, one who holds the book of the
play and prompts the actor in the theatre; BOOK'-HUNT'ER, one who rejoices
in discovering _rare_ books; BOOK'ING-OF'FICE, an office where names are
booked or tickets are taken.--_adj._ BOOK'ISH, fond of books: acquainted
only with books.--_ns._ BOOK'ISHNESS; BOOK'-KEEP'ING, the art of keeping
accounts in a regular and systematic manner; BOOK'-LAND, land taken from
the _folcland_ or common land, and granted by _bóc_ or written charter to a
private owner; BOOK'-LEARN'ING, learning got from books, as opposed to
practical knowledge.--_adj._ BOOK'LESS, without books, unlearned.--_ns._
BOOK'LET, a small book; BOOK'-MAK'ER, one who makes up books from the
writings of others, a compiler: one who makes a system of bets in such a
way that the gains must exceed the losses, entering them in a memorandum
book; BOOK'-MAK'ING, the art or practice of compiling books from the
writings of others: compilation: systematic betting; BOOK'-MAN, a scholar,
student; BOOK'-MARK, something placed in a book to mark a particular page
or passage; BOOK'-MATE (_Shak._), a mate or companion in the study of
books: a schoolfellow; BOOK'-MUS'LIN, muslin used in bookbinding;
BOOK'-OATH (_Shak._), an oath made on the Book or Bible; BOOK'PLATE, a
label usually pasted inside the cover of a book, bearing the owner's name,
crest, coat-of-arms, or peculiar device; BOOK'-POST, the department in the
Post-office for the transmission of books; BOOK'SELLER, one who sells
books; BOOK'SELLING; BOOK'SHELF, a shelf on which books are placed;
BOOK'SHOP, a shop where books are sold; BOOK'-STALL, a stall or stand,
generally in the open air, where books are sold; BOOK'-STAND, a book-stall:
a stand or support for holding up a book when reading; BOOK'-TRADE, the
trade of dealing in books; BOOK'WORM, a worm or mite that eats holes in
books: a hard reader: one who reads without discrimination or profit.--TO
BE UPON THE BOOKS, to have one's name in an official list; TO BRING TO
BOOK, to bring to account; TO TAKE A LEAF OUT OF ANOTHER'S BOOK, to follow
the example of some one; TO TALK LIKE A BOOK, to talk pedantically, or in a
preternaturally well-informed manner. [A.S. _bóc_, a book, the beech; Ger.
_buche_, the beech, _buch_, a book, because the Teutons first wrote on
beechen boards.]

BOOM, b[=oo]m, _n._ a pole by which a sail is stretched: a chain or bar
stretched across a harbour. [Dut. _boom_, a beam, a tree.]

BOOM, b[=oo]m, _v.i._ to make a hollow sound or roar: to go on with a rush,
to become suddenly prosperous.--_v.t._ to push anything into sudden
prominence:--_pa.p._ boomed (b[=oo]md); _pr.p._ boom'ing.--_n._ a hollow
roar, as of the sea, the cry of the bittern, &c.: a sudden increase of
activity in business, or the like--often the direct consequence of puffing
advertisements or less legitimate intrigues.--_p.adj._ BOOM'ING, rushing
with violence. [From a Low Ger. root found in A.S. _byme_, a trumpet, Dut.
_bommen_, to drum; like BOMB, of imit. origin.]

[Illustration]

BOOMERANG, b[=oo]m'e-rang, _n._ a hard-wood missile used by the natives of
Australia, shaped like the segment of a circle, and so balanced that when
thrown to a distance it returns towards the thrower. [Australian.]

BOON, b[=oo]n, _n._ a petition: a gift or favour. [Ice. _bôn_, a prayer;
A.S. _ben_.]

BOON, b[=oo]n, _adj._ gay, merry, or kind. [Fr. _bon_--L. _bonus_, good.]

BOOR, b[=oo]r, _n._ a countryman, a peasant: a Dutch colonist in South
Africa: a coarse or awkward person.--_adj._ BOOR'ISH, like a boor: awkward
or rude.--_adv._ BOOR'ISHLY.--_n._ BOOR'ISHNESS. [Dut. _boer_; Ger.
_bauer_. The A.S. _gebúr_, a farmer, may explain the East Anglian _bor_,
neighbour, as a form of address.]

BOORD, an obsolete form of BOARD.

BOOSE. See BOUSE.

BOOT, b[=oo]t, _n._ a covering for the foot and lower part of the leg
generally made of leather: an infamous instrument of judicial torture, in
which the legs were forced into a strong case and wedges driven in until
bone, muscle, and marrow were crushed together--also BOOT'IKIN: a box or
receptacle in a coach.--_v.t._ to put on boots.--_n._ BOOT'-CLOS'ER, one
who closes the upper leathers of boots.--_pa.p._ BOOT'ED, having boots on,
equipped for riding.--_ns._ BOOT'-HOOK, an instrument for pulling on long
boots; BOOT'HOSE (_Shak._), hose or stockings used in place of boots;
BOOT'-JACK, an instrument for taking off boots; BOOT'LACE, a lace for
fastening boots; BOOT'-LAST, BOOT'-TREE, the last or wooden mould on which
boots or shoes are made or stretched to keep their shape.--_adj._
BOOT'LESS, without boots: referring also, as in Tennyson's metaphorical
use, 'wedded to a bootless calf,' to the ancient custom at a marriage by
proxy of the quasi bridegroom putting one unbooted leg into the bride's
bed.--_n._ BOOTS, the servant at an inn who cleans the boots, runs
messages, &c.--in combination, as Lazy_boots_, Sly_boots_.--BOOT AND SADDLE
(a corr. of Fr. _bouteselle_, place saddle), the signal to cavalry to
mount.--LIKE OLD BOOTS (_slang_), vigorously, heartily.--SIX FEET IN HIS
BOOTS, quite six feet high.--TO DIE IN HIS BOOTS, to be cut off in the
midst of health, as by the rope; TO HAVE ONE'S HEART IN ONE'S BOOTS, to be
in a state of extreme terror. [O. Fr. _bote_ (mod. _botte_)--Low L.
_botta_, _bota_, of dubious origin.]

BOOT, b[=oo]t, _v.t._ to profit or advantage.--_n._ advantage: profit: any
reparation or compensation paid, like the _man-bote_ of old English law:
(_Shak._) booty.--_adj._ BOOT'LESS, without boot or profit:
useless.--_adv._ BOOT'LESSLY.--_n._ BOOT'LESSNESS.--TO BOOT, in addition;
TO MAKE BOOT OF (_Shak._), to make profit of. [A.S. _bót_, compensation,
amends, whence _betan_, to amend, to make BETTER.]

BOOTES, bo-[=o]'tez, _n._ a northern constellation beside the Great Bear,
containing the bright star Arcturus. [Gr.; an ox-driver.]

BOOTH, b[=oo]th, _n._ a hut or temporary erection formed of slight
materials: a covered stall at a fair or market. [Ice. _buð_, Ger. _bude_.]

BOOTY, b[=oo]t'i, _n._ spoil taken in war or by force: plunder, a
prize.--TO PLAY BOOTY, to join with others in order to cheat one player, to
play a game with intention to lose. [Ice. _býti_, share--_býta_, to
divide.]

BOOZE. See BOUSE.

BO-PEEP, bo-p[=e]p', _n._ a simple play among children in which one peeps
from behind something and cries 'Bo.'

BORA, b[=o]'ra, _n._ a strong north-east wind in the upper Adriatic. [Diez
explains the word as a Venetian variant of It. _borea_--L. _boreas_; acc.
to others, Slav.; cf. Servian _bura_.]

BORACHIO, bor-ach'i-o, _n._ a Spanish wine-bottle of leather: a drunken
fellow. [Sp. _borracha_.]

BORAGE, bur'[=a]j, _n._ a plant of the genus Borago, formerly in great
repute as a cordial. [Low L. _borago_.]

BORAX, b[=o]'raks, _n._ a mineral salt used for soldering, as a flux in
metallurgy, in enamelling and glazing, as a mordant in dyeing, as a
substitute for soap, and also in medicine.--_adj._ BORAC'IC, of or relating
to borax.--_ns._ BOR'ACITE, a mineral composed of boracic acid and
carbonate of magnesia; B[=O]'RATE, a salt of boracic acid.--BORACIC ACID,
an acid obtained by dissolving borax, and also found native in mineral
springs in Italy. [Through Fr. and Low L. _borax_, _borac-em_, from Ar.
_bûraq_.]

BORDAR, bord'ar, _n._ a villein who held his hut at his lord's pleasure.
[Low L. _bordarius_; of Teut. origin. See BOARD.]

BORDEAUX, bor-d[=o]', _n._ claret, wine of _Bordeaux_, a great city in the
south-west of France.

BORDEL, bor'del, _n._ a house for prostitution. [O. Fr. _bordel_, a
cabin--Low L. _borda_.]

BORDER, bord'[.e]r, _n._ the edge or margin of anything: the march or
boundary of a country, esp. that between England and Scotland: a flower-bed
in a garden: a piece of ornamental edging or trimming round a garment,
&c.--_v.i._ to resemble (with _on_): to be adjacent (with _upon_,
_with_).--_v.t._ to make or adorn with a border: to bound.--_ns._
BORD'ERER, one who dwells on the border of a country; BORD'ER-LAND.--_adj._
BORD'ERLESS. [O. Fr. _bordure_; from root of BOARD.]

BORD-RAGING. See BODRAGING.

BORDURE, bor'd[=u]r, _n._ (_her._) a border surrounding a shield, generally
said to occupy one-fifth of the field. [BORDER.]

BORE, b[=o]r, _v.t._ to pierce so as to form a hole; to weary or
annoy.--_n._ a hole made by boring: the size of the cavity of a gun; a
person or thing that wearies (not from the foregoing, according to Dr
Murray, who says both verb and noun arose after 1750).--_ns._ BOR'ER, the
person or thing that bores: a genus of sea-worms that pierce wood; a name
common to many insects that pierce wood; BOR'ING, the act of making a hole
in anything: a hole made by boring: (_pl._) the chips produced by boring.
[A.S. _borian_, to bore; cf. Ger. _bohren_; allied to L. _for-[=a]re_, to
bore, Gr. _pharynx_, the gullet.]

BORE, b[=o]r, did bear, _pa.t._ of BEAR.

BORE, b[=o]r, _n._ a tidal flood which rushes with great violence up the
estuaries of certain rivers, also called _Eagre_. [Ice. _bára_, a wave or
swell.]

BOREAS, b[=o]'re-as, _n._ the north wind.--_adj._ B[=O]'REAL. [L. and Gr.]

BORIC. Same as BORACIC (q.v. under BORAX).

BORN, bawrn,--_pa.p._ of BEAR, to bring forth.--BORN AGAIN, having received
new spiritual life or regeneration through Christ.--BORN IN, or WITH,
inherited by birth; BORN OF, sprung from.--A BORN FOOL, one whose folly is
from his birth--also in compounds, as _English-born_, _eldest-born_,
_base-born_, _gently-born_, _well-born_, &c.--IN ONE'S BORN DAYS, in one's
life-time.

BORNE, b[=o]rn, _pa.p._ of BEAR, to carry.

BORNÉ, bor'n[=a], _adj._ limited, narrow-minded. [Fr. pa.p. of _borner_, to
limit.]

BORON, b[=o]'ron, _n._ a simple non-metallic element present in borax and
boracic acid, obtained in crystals which resemble diamonds. [See BORAX.]

BOROUGH, bur'[=o], _n._ a town with a corporation and special privileges
granted by royal charter; a town that sends representatives to
parliament.--_ns._ BOR'OUGH-ENGLISH, a custom in some ancient English
boroughs, by which estates descend to the youngest son or the youngest
brother; BOR'OUGHMONGER, one who buys or sells the patronage of boroughs;
BOR'OUGH-REEVE, the chief municipal official in some unincorporated English
towns prior to 1835.--CLOSE or POCKET BOROUGH, a borough the representation
of which was in the nomination of some person--common before 1832; COUNTY
BOROUGH, a borough of above 50,000 inhabitants, constituted by the Local
Government Act of 1888; ROTTEN BOROUGH, one which still returned members to
parliament although the constituency had disappeared--all abolished in
1832.--The Scotch terms are grouped under BURGH. [A.S. _burg_, _burh_, a
city, from _beorgan_; Ger. _bergen_, to protect.]

BORREL, bor'el, _adj._ (_Spens._) rustic, clownish. [O. Fr. _burel_, coarse
cloth worn by peasantry.]

BORROW, bor'[=o], _v.t._ to obtain on loan or trust: to adopt from a
foreign source: to derive one's authority from another (with _from_,
_of_).--_p.adj._ BORR'OWED, taken on loan, counterfeit, assumed.--_n._
BORR'OWER.--BORROWING DAYS, the last three days of March (O.S.), supposed
in Scotch folklore to have been borrowed by March from April, and to be
especially stormy. [A.S. _borgian_--_borg_, _borh_, a pledge, security.]

BORSTALL, bor'stal, _n._ a way up a hill, still used in the district of the
Downs. [A.S. _beorh_, a hill, and _stigel_, a stile.]

BORT, bort, _n._ diamond-dust. [Fr.]

BORZOI, bor'zoi, _n._ a breed of dogs of great grace and beauty, in shape
like a gigantic greyhound, though covered with a soft coat about the length
of a deerhound's. [Russ.]

BOSCAGE, bosk'[=a]j, _n._ thick foliage: woodland. [Fr. _boscage_,
_bocage_--Low L. _boscus_ (hence Fr. _bois_), conn. with Ger. _busch_, Eng.
BUSH.]

BOSH, bosh, _n._ used also as _interj._ nonsense, foolish talk or opinions.
[Turk. _bosh_, worthless, frequent in Morier's popular novel _Ayesha_
(1834).]

BOSKY, bosk'i, _adj._ woody or bushy: shady.--_ns._ BOSK'ET, BOSK
(_Tennyson_), a thicket.

BOSOM, b[=oo]z'um, _n._ the breast of a human being, or the part of the
dress which covers it: (_fig._) the seat of the passions and feelings: the
heart: embrace, enclosure, as within the arms: any close or secret
receptacle.--_adj._ (in composition) confidential: intimate.--_v.t._ to
enclose in the bosom.--ABRAHAM'S BOSOM, the abode of the blessed dead.--TO
TAKE TO ONE'S BOSOM, to marry: to make an intimate friend of. [A.S. _bósm_;
Ger. _busen_.]

BOSON, b[=o]'sn, _n._ a corruption of BOATSWAIN.

[Illustration]

BOSS, bos, _n._ a knob or stud: a raised ornament.--_v.t._ to ornament with
bosses.--_adj._ BOSS'Y, having bosses.--_p.adj._ BOSSED, embossed. [O. Fr.
_boce_ (Fr. _bosse_), from Old Ger. _bôzan_, to beat.]

BOSS, bos, _n._ the chief or leader: the master, manager, or foreman: the
person who pulls the wires in political intrigues.--_adj._ chief:
excellent.--_v.t._ to manage or control.--TO BOSS THE SHOW, to be supreme
director of an enterprise. [Amer.; from the New York Dutch _baas_, master;
cog. with Ger. _base_, a cousin.]

BOSTANGI, bos-tan'ji, _n._ a Turkish guard of the palace. [Turk.]

BOSTON, bost'on, _n._ a game at cards, somewhat similar to whist. [From
_Boston_ in Mass., U.S.]

BOSWELLIAN, bos-wel'li-an, _adj._ after the manner of _Boswell_, the famous
biographer of Samuel Johnson.--_v.i._ BOS'WELLISE, to write after the
manner of Boswell--full of an absolute admiration for one's hero and
interest in him descending to the smallest particulars.--_n._ BOS'WELLISM.

BOT. See BOTS.

BOTANY, bot'an-i, _n._ the science of plants.--_adj._ BOTAN'IC.--_adv._
BOTAN'ICALLY.--_v.i._ BOT'ANISE, to seek for and collect plants for
study.--_ns._ BOT'ANIST, one skilled in botany; BOT'ANOMANCY, divination by
means of plants, esp. the leaves of the sage and fig.--BOTANY BAY, a famous
convict settlement in New South Wales, near to what is now Sydney: convict
settlements generally. [Gr. _botan[=e]_, herb, plant--_bosk-ein_, to feed,
L. _vescor_, I feed myself; perh. cog. with A.S. _woed_.]

BOTARGO, bot-ar'go, _n._ a relish made of mullet or tunny roe. [It.--Ar.]

BOTCH, boch, _n._ a swelling on the skin: a clumsy patch: ill-finished
work.--_v.t._ to patch or mend clumsily: to put together unsuitably or
unskilfully.--_ns._ BOTCH'ER, one who botches; BOTCH'WORK,
BOTCH'ERY.--_adj._ BOTCH'Y, marked with or full of botches. [From root of
BOSS.]

BOTFLY. See BOTS.

BOTH, b[=o]th, _adj._ and _pron._ the two: the one and the other.--_conj._
as well: on the one side. [Ice. _bathi_, Ger. _beide_; A.S. _bâ_; cf. L.
_am-bo_, Gr. _am-ph[=o]_, Sans. _ubha_, orig. _ambha_.]

BOTHER, bo_th_'[.e]r, _v.t._ to perplex or tease.--_ns._ BOTH'ER;
BOTHER[=A]'TION.--_adj._ BOTH'ERSOME. [Murray notes that the word first
appeared in the writings of Irish-born men, as Dr Sheridan, Swift, and
Sterne. Perh. from Ir. _buaidhirt_, trouble.]

BOTHY, BOTHIE, both'i, _n._ a humble cottage or hut: a temporary house for
men engaged in some common work, esp. the barely furnished quarters
provided for farm-servants, generally unmarried men, in the eastern and
north-eastern counties of Scotland.--The BOTHY SYSTEM is apparently
economical, but is detrimental to health and to morality.

BOTONÉ, BOTTONY, bot'un-i, _adj._ (_her._) having buds or knobs at the
extremity, applied to a cross having each arm terminated in three buds,
like trefoil. [O. Fr. See BUTTON.]

BO-TREE, b[=o]'-tr[=e], _n._ the name given in Ceylon to the Pipal or
Peepul of India (_Ficus religiosa_), held sacred by the Buddhists, and
planted close by every temple. [Singh. _bo_, from Pali _bodhi_, perfect
knowledge.]

BOTS, BOTTS, botz, _n._ the larvæ of the botfly found in the flesh and in
the intestines of animals.--_n._ BOT'FLY, a family of dipterous insects,
resembling the blue-bottle fly, which deposit their eggs on cattle. [Ety.
unknown; hardly conn. with BITE.]

BOTTINE, bot'[=e]n, _n._ a high boot, a half-boot. [Fr., dim. of _botte_, a
boot.]

BOTTLE, bot'l, _n._ a bundle of hay.--TO LOOK FOR A NEEDLE IN A BOTTLE OF
HAY, to engage in a hopeless se_arch._ [O. Fr. _botel_.]

BOTTLE, bot'l, _n._ a hollow vessel for holding liquids: the contents of
such a vessel: the habit of drinking.--_v.t._ to enclose in bottles.--_n._
BOTT'LE-CHART, one which purports to show the track of sealed bottles
thrown from ships into the sea.--_p.adj._ BOTT'LED, enclosed in bottles:
shaped or protuberant like a bottle: kept in restraint.--_ns._
BOTT'LE-GLASS, a coarse green glass used in the making of bottles;
BOTT'LE-GOURD, or _False Calabash_, a climbing, musky-scented Indian
annual, whose fruit is shaped like a bottle, an urn, or a club.--_adjs._
BOTT'LE-GREEN, dark green in colour, like bottle-glass.--BOTT'LE-HEAD,
BOTT'LE-NOSED, having a rounded prominent head, with a short snout, as a
certain genus of whale.--_ns._ BOTT'LE-HOLD'ER, one who attends upon a
boxer at a prize-fight, a backer or supporter generally; BOTT'LE-IMP, an
imp supposed to be confined in a bottle; BOTT'LE-WASH'ER, one whose
business it is to wash out the bottles, a factotum generally.--A
THREE-BOTTLE MAN, one who could drink three bottles without losing his
decorum.--TO BOTTLE OFF, to draw from the cask and put into bottles; TO
BOTTLE UP (one's wrath, &c.), to keep enclosed as in a bottle; TO BRING UP
ON THE BOTTLE, to rear an infant artificially rather than by the breast; TO
PASS THE BOTTLE, to make the drink go round; TO PASS THE BOTTLE OF SMOKE,
to acquiesce in some falsehood, to make pretence. [O. Fr. _bouteille_, dim.
of _botte_, a vessel for liquids--Low L. _butis_, a vessel.]

BOTTOM, bot'um, _n._ the lowest part of anything: that on which anything
rests or is founded: the sitting part of the human body: the foot of a
page, &c.: low land, as in a valley: the keel of a ship, hence the vessel
itself: the fundamental character of anything, as physical stamina,
financial resources, &c.: the portion of a wig hanging down over the
shoulder, as in 'full-bottom'--full-bottomed wig: (_Shak._) a ball of
thread.--_v.t._ to found or rest upon: (_Shak._) to wind round or
upon.--_adj._ BOTT'OMED.--_ns._ BOTT'OM-GLADE, a glade or open space in a
bottom or valley; BOTT'OM-GRASS (_Shak._) grass growing on bottom
lands.--_adj._ BOTT'OMLESS.--_n._ BOTT'OMRY, a contract by which money is
borrowed on the security of a ship or bottom.--BOTTOMLESS PIT--hell.--AT
BOTTOM, in reality.--FROM THE BOTTOM OF THE HEART, from the very heart.--TO
BE AT THE BOTTOM OF, to be the real origin of; TO STAND ON ONE'S OWN
BOTTOM, to be independent of; TO TOUCH BOTTOM, to reach the lowest point.
[A.S. _botm_; Ger. _boden_; conn. with L. _fundus_, bottom, Gael. _bonn_,
the sole.]

BOTTONY. See BOTONÉ.

BOUDOIR, b[=oo]d'war, _n._ a lady's private room. [Fr.--_bouder_, to pout,
to be sulky.]

BOUFFANT, boof'ang, _adj._ puffed out, in dressmaking. [Fr.]

BOUFFE. See OPERA-BOUFFE.

BOUGAINVILLÆA, b[=oo]g-[=a]n-vil-[=e]'a, _n._ a neotropical genus of
Nyctaginaceæ, frequently trained over trellises or under the roofs of
greenhouses, their triplets of flowers almost concealed by rosy or purple
bracts. [From the first French circumnavigator of the globe, Louis Antoine
de _Bougainville_ (1729-1811).]

BOUGH, bow, _n._ a branch of a tree: the gallows. [A.S. _bóg_, _bóh_, an
arm, the shoulder (Ger. _bug_, the shoulder, the bow of a ship)--A.S.
_bugan_, to bend.]

BOUGHT, bawt, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BUY.--BOUGHT'EN in an archaic form.

BOUGHT, bowt, _n._ a bight or bend: (_Spens._) a twist or coil: the bend of
a sling in which the stone is placed. [See BIGHT.]

BOUGIE, b[=oo]'zhi, _n._ an instrument made of elastic, gum, wax, or metal,
for distending contracted mucous canals, as the gullet, bowels, or urethra.
[Fr. a 'wax candle,' because the instrument was orig. made of waxed linen,
from _Bougie_ in Algeria.]

BOUILLABAISSE, b[=oo]-lya-b[=a]s', _n._ a Provençal kind of fish chowder,
familiar through Thackeray's appreciative ballad. [Fr.]

BOUILLI, b[=oo]'-y[=e], _n._ boiled or stewed meat.--_n._ BOUILLON
(b[=oo]-yong), soup. [Fr. See BOIL.]

BOULDER, b[=o]ld'[.e]r, _n._ a large stone rounded by the action of water:
(_geol._) a mass of rock transported by natural agencies from its native
bed.--_adj._ containing boulders.--_n._ BOULD'ER-CLAY (see TILL, 4). [Acc.
to Wedgwood, from Swed. _bullra_, Dan. _buldre_, to roar like thunder, as
large pebbles do.]

BOULEVARD, b[=oo]l'e-vär, _n._ a broad walk or promenade bordered with
trees, originally applied to those formed upon the demolished
fortifications of a town.--_n._ BOUL'EVARDIER, a frequenter of the
boulevards. [Fr.--Ger. _bollwerk_. See BULWARK.]

BOULEVERSEMENT, b[=oo]l-vers-mang, _n._ an overturning. [Fr.]

BOULT, b[=o]lt, _v.t._ (_Spens._). Same as BOLT (2).

BOUN, BOWNE, bown, _v.t._ (used _refl._) to prepare one's self, to have
recourse to.--_v.i._ to prepare, dress: to set out, to go to a
place--(_Spens._) BOUND. [_Boun_, earlier form of _bound_--revived by
Scott.]

BOUNCE, bowns, _v.i._ to jump or spring suddenly: to bound like a ball, to
throw one's self about: (_obs._) to beat: to burst into or out of a room,
&c.: to boast, to exaggerate.--_n._ a heavy, sudden blow: a leap or spring:
a boast: a bold lie.--_adv._ and _interj._ expressing sudden
movement.--_n._ BOUNC'ER, one who bounces: something big: a bully: a
liar.--_adj._ BOUNC'ING, large and heavy: lusty: swaggering. [Dut.
_bonzen_, to strike, from _bons_, a blow.]

BOUND, bownd, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BIND, confined, bandaged: intimately
connected with--'bound up in:' of books, having a cover of, as 'bound in
morocco,' &c. (with _in_): under obligation or necessity to, as 'bound to
win.'--_n._ BOUND'-BAIL'IFF, a sheriff's officer, so called from his bond
given to the sheriff for the discharge of his duty.

BOUND, bownd, _n._ a limit or boundary: the limit of anything, as
patience--'to break bounds,' to go beyond what is reasonable or allowable:
(_pl._) a border-land, land generally within certain understood limits, the
district.--_v.t._ to set bounds to: to limit, restrain, or surround.--_n._
BOUND'ARY, a visible limit: border: termination.--_p.adj._ BOUND'ED,
restricted, cramped.--_n._ BOUND'ER, a boisterous or overbearing
person.--_adj._ BOUND'LESS, having no limit: vast.--_n._ BOUND'LESSNESS.
[O. Fr. _bonne_--Low L. _bodina_, of doubtful origin; cf. Bret. _bonn_, a
boundary.]

BOUND, bownd, _v.i._ to spring or leap.--_n._ a spring or leap.--_p.adj._
BOUND'ING, moving forward with a bound: leaping.--BY LEAPS AND BOUNDS, by
startlingly rapid stages. [Fr. _bondir_, to spring, in O. Fr. to
resound--L. _bombit[=a]re_. See BOOM, the sound.]

BOUND, bownd, _adj._ ready to go--as in 'outward bound,' &c. [Ice. _búinn_,
pa.p of _búa_, to prepare.]

BOUNDEN, bownd'n, _adj._ binding: required: obligatory. [From BIND.]

BOUNTY, bown'ti, _n._ liberality in bestowing gifts: the gift bestowed:
money offered as an inducement to enter the army, or as a premium to
encourage any branch of industry.--_adjs._ BOUN'TEOUS, BOUN'TIFUL, liberal
in giving: generous.--_advs._ BOUN'TEOUSLY, BOUN'TIFULLY.--_ns._
BOUN'TEOUSNESS, BOUN'TIFULNESS; BOUN'TIHOOD.--LADY BOUNTIFUL, a character
in Farquhar's _Beaux' Stratagem_, now used for the great lady of any
district. [O. Fr. _bontet_ (_bonté_), goodness--L.
_bonitatem_--_bonus_--good.]

BOUQUET, b[=oo]k'[=a], _n._ a bunch of flowers: a nosegay: the perfume
exhaled by wine. [Fr. _bosquet_, dim. of _bois_, a wood--It. _bosco_. See
BOSCAGE, BUSH.]

BOURASQUE, b[=oo]-rask', _n._ a tempest. [Fr. _bourrasque_; It. _borasco_,
a storm.]

BOURBONIST, b[=oo]r'bun-ist, _n._ an adherent of the _Bourbons_, the old
French royal dynasty.

BOURD, b[=oo]rd, _n._ (_Spens._) a jest, sport.--_n._ BOURD'ER (_obs._), a
jester. [O. Fr. _bourde_, origin unknown.]

BOURDON, b[=oo]r'dun, _n._ the refrain of a song: a bass stop in an organ
or harmonium. [See BURDEN.]

BOURDON, b[=oo]r'dun, _n._ (_obs._) a pilgrim's staff: a club. [Fr.--Low L.
_burdon-em_, a mule.]

BOURG, burg, _n._ Same as BURGH, BOROUGH.

BOURGEOIS, bur-jois', _n._ a kind of printing type, larger than brevier and
smaller than longprimer. [Fr.--perh. from the name of the typefounder.]

BOURGEOISIE, b[=oo]rzh'waw-z[=e], _n._ the middle class of citizens, esp.
traders. [From Fr. _bourgeois_, a citizen, often taken as a typical word
for the mercantile middle class--used also adjectively, like such in
manners or ways of thinking.]

BOURGEON, bur'jun, _v.i._ to put forth sprouts or buds: to grow. [Fr.
_bourgeon_, a bud, shoot.]

BOURIGNIAN, b[=oo]r-in'yan, _adj._ of or pertaining to Antoinette
_Bourignon_ (1616-80), a religious visionary who made religion consist in
inward emotion, not in knowledge or practice.--BOURIGN'IANISM was strong in
Scotland about the beginning of the 18th century, and ministers at
ordination renounced it down till 1889.

BOURLAW. See BYRLAW.

BOURN, BOURNE, b[=o]rn, or b[=oo]rn, _n._ a boundary, a limit, or goal:
(_Keats_) domain. [Fr. _borne_, a limit. See BOUND (2).]

BOURN, BOURNE. See BURN (1).

BOURSE, b[=oo]rs, _n._ an exchange where merchants meet for business. [Fr.
_bourse_. See PURSE.]

BOURTREE, b[=oo]r'tr[=e], _n._ the elder-tree--also BOUN'TREE.--_n._
BOUR'TREE-GUN, a pop-gun made of a piece of its wood by taking out the
pith. [_Scot._; ety. unknown.]

BOUSE, BOOZE, BOOSE, b[=oo]z, _v.i._ to drink deeply.--_n._ a drinking
bout.--_adj._ BOUS'ING, drinking.--_n._ BOUS'INGKEN, a low
drinking-shop.--_adj._ BOUS'Y, inclined to bouse: drunken. [Dut. _buysen_,
to drink deeply--_buis_, a tube or flask; allied to BOX.]

BOUSTROPHEDON, bow-strof-[=e]'don, _adj._ and _adv._ written ploughwise,
alternately from right to left and from left to right--a form of alphabetic
writing intermediate between the oldest Greek inscriptions (from right to
left, as in Semitic scripts) and the more convenient method of left to
right (from 7th century). [Gr.; _bou-strophos_, ox-turning.]

BOUT, bowt, _n._ a turn, trial, or round: an attempt: a contest or trial--a
fencing bout, or a continued fit of drinking. [Doublet of BIGHT; from root
of BOW, to bend.]

BOUTADE, b[=oo]-tad', _n._ a sudden outburst. [Fr.; _bouter_, to thrust.]

BOUTS-RIMÉS, b[=oo]-r[=e]-m[=a]', _n.pl._ rhyming words given out by some
one of a party as the endings of a stanza, the others having to fill up the
lines as best they may. [Fr.]

BOVINE, b[=o]'v[=i]n, _adj._ pertaining to cattle. [L. _bos_, _bovis_, Gr.
_bous_, an ox or cow.]

BOVRIL, bov'ril, _n._ a registered trade-mark applied to a special meat
extract. [Coined from Gr. _bous_, _bovis_, an ox, and _vril_, the electric
fluid represented as the one common origin of the forces in matter, in
Lytton's novel _The Coming Race_, 1871.]

BOW, bow, _v.i._ to bend the body in saluting a person, acknowledging a
compliment, &c.: to submit.--_v.t._ to bend or incline downwards, to crush
down (with _down_, _to_, _in_ or _out_, _up_ or _down_).--_n._ a bending of
the body in saluting a person.--_adj._ BOW'-BACKED, crook-backed.--A BOWING
ACQUAINTANCE, a slight acquaintance.--TO MAKE ONE'S BOW, to retire
ceremoniously, to leave the stage. [A.S. _búgan_, to bend; akin to L.
_fug-[)e]re_, to flee, to yield.]

BOW, b[=o], _n._ a piece of elastic wood or other material for shooting
arrows, bent by means of a string stretched between its two ends: anything
of a bent or curved shape, as the rainbow: the instrument by which the
strings of a violin are sounded: a ring of metal forming a handle: a knot
composed of one or of two loops and two ends (_single bow_, _double bow_),
a looped knot of ribbons, a necktie or the like, so tied.--_adj._ BOW'BENT
(_Milton_), bent like a bow.--_n._ BOW'-BOY, a boy archer: (_Shak._)
Cupid.--_n.pl._ BOW'-COM'PASSES, compasses, one leg of which slides on a
bow or curved plate of metal to steady its motion: a small pair of
compasses for describing circles with ink or pencil.--_adj._ BOWED.--_ns._
BOW'-HAND, in archery, the left hand, the one by which the bow is held:
(_mus._) the right hand, the one that draws the bow; BOW'-LEG, a leg
crooked like a bow.--_adj._ BOW'-LEGGED, having crooked legs.--_ns._
BOW'LINE, a rope from the weather side of the square sails (to which it is
fastened by _bridles_) to the larboard or starboard bow, to keep the sail
close to the wind; BOW'MAN, an archer; BOW'SHOT, the distance to which an
arrow can be shot from a bow; BOW'STRING, the string by which a bow is
drawn: a string with which the Turks strangled offenders; BOW'-WIN'DOW, a
bent or semicircular window.--_adj._ BOW'-WIN'DOWED (_slang_),
pot-bellied.--_n._ BOW'YER (_obs._), a bowman: a maker of bows.--BOWLINE
KNOT, a simple but secure knot, used in fastening the bowline bridles to
the cringles.--ON THE BOW HAND, wide of the mark.--TO DRAW THE LONG BOW, to
make extravagant statements; TO HAVE TWO (or more) STRINGS TO ONE'S BOW, to
have other alternatives. [A.S. _boga_; cog. with Ger. _bogen_.]

BOW, bow, _n._ the general name for the stem and forepart of a ship, or
that which cuts the water--often used in _pl._, the ship being considered
to have starboard and port bows, meeting at the stem.--_ns._ BOW'ER,
BOW'ER-ANCH'OR, an anchor at the bow or forepart of a ship--usually two,
the _best-bower_ and the _small-bower_; BOW'-OAR, the oar nearest the
bow.--A BOLD, or BLUFF, BOW, a broad bow; A LEAN BOW, a narrow one.--ON THE
BOW, within 45° of the point right ahead.

BOWDLERISE, bowd'l[.e]r-[=i]z, _v.t._ to expurgate a book or writing, to
remove indelicate words or phrases, esp. to do so unnecessarily.--_ns._
BOWDLERIS[=A]'TION; BOWD'LERISER; BOWD'LERISM. [From Dr T. _Bowdler_
(1754-1825), who published an expurgated Shakespeare in ten volumes in
1818.]

BOWELS, bow'elz, _n.pl._ the interior parts of the body, the entrails, the
intestines: the interior part of anything: (_fig._) the heart, pity,
tenderness (the emotions being supposed to be seated in the bowels--_B._
and _Shak._).--_v.t._ BOW'EL, to take out the bowels. [O. Fr. _boel_--L.
_botellus_, a sausage, also an intestine.]

BOWER, bow'[.e]r, _n._ a shady enclosure or recess in a garden, an arbour:
an inner apartment, esp. the private room of a lady, a boudoir.--_n._
BOW'ER-BIRD, an Australian bird of the Starling family, remarkable for its
habit of making bower-like erections ornamented with gay feathers, shells,
&c.--_adj._ BOW'ERY, containing bowers: shady. [A.S. _búr_, a chamber;
Scot, _byre_--root A.S. _búan_, to dwell.]

BOWER, bow'[.e]r, _n._ the name in euchre for the two highest cards, the
knave of trumps, and the other knave of the same colour, the _right_ and
_left_ bower respectively. [Ger. _bauer_, peasant.]

[Illustration]

BOWIE-KNIFE, b[=o]'i-n[=i]f, _n._ a dagger-knife with a blade about twelve
inches long, carried in the southern states of America--so named from its
inventor, Colonel _Bowie_.

BOWL, b[=o]l, _n._ a wooden ball used for rolling along the ground.--_v.t._
and _v.i._ to play at bowls: to roll along like a bowl: to throw a ball, as
in cricket.--_ns._ BOWL'ER, one who plays at bowls: one who bowls the ball
in cricket; BOWL'ING, the act of playing at bowls, or of throwing a ball,
as in cricket; BOWL'ING-AL'LEY, a long narrow covered place for bowling;
BOWL'ING-GREEN, a green or grassy plat kept smooth for bowling. [Fr.
_boule_--L. _bulla_.]

BOWL, b[=o]l, _n._ a basin for domestic use, esp. of earthenware or
porcelain, nearly hemispherical in shape: a large punch-bowl, for brewing
punch in: a round drinking-cup, rather wide than deep--hence 'the bowl,'
'the flowing bowl,' as synonyms for conviviality; the round hollow part of
anything. [A.S. _bolla_. See BOLE.]

BOWLDER, b[=o]ld'[.e]r, _n._ Same as BOULDER.

BOWSE. Same as BOUSE.

BOWSPRIT, b[=o]'sprit, _n._ a strong spar projecting over the stem-head or
bows of a sailing-ship, and also of a steamship when her stem is of the
curved or cutwater description. [Dut. _boegspriet_.]

BOX, boks, _n._ a tree remarkable for the hardness and smoothness of its
wood--also BOX-TREE (_Shak._): a case or receptacle for holding anything:
the contents of a box: a small house or lodge, as a _shooting-box_, &c.: in
a theatre, a small enclosure with several seats--_the boxes_ = their
occupants, the ladies: an old square pew or similar enclosure, as a
_sentry-box_, _signal-box_, &c.: the driver's seat on a carriage: the case
in which the ship's compass is kept.--_v.t._ to put into or furnish with
boxes: (_slang_) to overturn a watchman in his box.--_ns._ BOX'-BED, a kind
of bed once common in Scotch cottages, having its ends, sides, and roof of
wood, and capable of being closed in front by two sliding panels; BOX'-DAY,
one of the Court of Session vacation days when papers ordered to be
deposited in court must be lodged.--_adj._ BOX'EN, made of or like
boxwood.--_ns._ BOX'ING-DAY, in England, the day after Christmas, when
boxes or presents are given; BOX'-[=I]'RON, a hollow smoothing-iron which
is heated by a heater put into it; BOX'-KEEP'ER, an attendant who opens the
doors of boxes at theatres or other places of public amusement;
BOX'-LOBB'Y, the lobby leading to the boxes in a theatre; BOX'WOOD, wood of
the box-tree.--IN THE WRONG BOX, in a false position, in a scrape.--TO BE
IN A BOX, to be in a fix; TO BOX HARRY, to take a beefsteak, mutton-chop,
or bacon and eggs with tea or ale, instead of the regulation dinner of the
commercial traveller; TO BOX THE COMPASS, to name the 32 points in their
order and backwards, hence to make a complete roundabout in any opinion.
[A.S. _box_--L. _buxus_--Gr. _pyxos_, the tree, _pyxis_, a box.]

BOX, boks, _n._ a blow on the head or ear with the hand.--_v.t._ to strike
with the hand or fist.--_v.i._ to fight with the fists.--_ns._ BOX'ER;
BOX'ING, the act of fighting with the fists: a combat with the fists;
BOX'ING-GLOVE, a padded glove worn in boxing.

BOXHAUL, boks'hawl, _v.t._ to veer a ship sharp round on her heel, by
putting the helm a-lee, bracing the head-yards flat aback, and hauling to
windward the head-sheets.

BOY, boy, _n._ a male child: a lad: a young man generally, used for 'man'
in Ireland and elsewhere: (_Shak._) a camp-follower: (_obs._) knave: a
native servant in South India, China, a male negro slave or native labourer
in the South Seas.--_v.t._ to play the boy.--_n._ BOY'HOOD.--_adj._
BOY'ISH.--_adv._ BOY'ISHLY.--_n._ BOY'ISHNESS.--BOY'S LOVE, a popular name
for southernwood; BOY'S PLAY, trifling. [M. E. _boi_, _boy_; Fris. _boi_;
Dut. _boef_, Ger. _bube_.]

BOYAR, boy'är, _n._ an order of the old Russian aristocracy, holding the
chief military and civil offices prior to the reforms of Peter the Great.

BOYCOTT, boy'kot, _v.t._ to shut out from all social and commercial
intercourse--a kind of secular excommunication. [From Captain _Boycott_ of
County Mayo, who was so treated by his neighbours in Dec. 1880.]

BRABBLE, brab'bl, _v.i._ to babble or clamour: to brawl or wrangle.--_n._
(_Shak._) a clamorous contest, a brawl: a quibble. [Dut. _brabbelen_, to
stammer, to jabber.]

BRACCIO, brach'yo, _n._ an Italian measure of length, varying from half a
yard to a yard:--_pl._ BRACCIA (brach-ya). [It., an arm.]

[Illustration]

BRACE, br[=a]s, _n._ anything that draws together and holds tightly: a
bandage: a pair or couple: an instrument of wood or iron used by carpenters
and metal-workers for turning boring tools: in printing, a mark connecting
two or more words or lines (}): (_pl._) straps for supporting the trousers:
ropes for squaring or traversing horizontally the yards of a ship.--_v.t._
to tighten or strengthen, to give firmness to.--_adj._ BRAC'ING, giving
strength or tone. [O. Fr. _brace_ (Fr. _bras_), the arm, power--L.
_brachium_, Gr. _brachi[=o]n_, the arm, as holding together.]

BRACE, br[=a]s, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to embrace, encompass.

BRACELET, br[=a]s'let, _n._ an ornament for the wrist. [Fr.; dim. of O. Fr.
_brac_. See BRACE.]

BRACH, brach, _n._ a dog for the chase, a bitch-hound. [O. Fr. _brachet_,
pl. _brachès_, dim. of _brac_--Low L. _bracco_, of Teut. origin.]

BRACHIAL, brak'i-al, _adj._ belonging to the arm.--BRACHIAL ARTERY, the
great arterial trunk supplying the upper extremity between the armpit and
the elbow--the direct continuation of the axillary artery. [See BRACE.]

BRACHIOPODA, brak-i-op'o-da, BRACHIOPODS, brak'i-o-pods, _n.pl._ a class of
shelled animals having certain affinities with worms and with Polyzoa, but
less with molluscs, provided with two long arm-like processes arising from
the sides of the mouth, probably respiratory, and certainly serving to waft
little food particles to the mouth. [Gr. _brachi[=o]n_, an arm, and _pous_,
_pod-os_, a foot.]

BRACHYCEPHALIC, brak-i-sef-al'ik (also sef'-), BRACHYCEPHALOUS,
brak-i-sef'al-us, _adj._ short-headed, applied in ethnology to skulls of
which the breadth is at least four-fifths of the length--opp. to
_Dolichocephalic_.

BRACHYPTEROUS, brak-ip't[.e]r-us, _adj._ lit. short-winged: having wings
which, when folded, do not reach to the base of the tail. [Gr. _brachys_,
short, _pteron_, a wing.]

BRACK, brak, _n._ a flaw in cloth. [See BREAK.]

BRACKEN, brak'en, _n._ fern. [See BRAKE.]

BRACKET, brak'et, _n._ a support for something fastened to a wall, the
ornamental metal pipe bearing gas-lamps, &c.: (_pl._) in printing, the
marks [ ] used to enclose one or more words: one of the side pieces of a
gun-carriage, supporting the trunnions.--_v.t._ to support by brackets: to
enclose by brackets: to group two names, as in an honour list, implying
equality. [Fr. _braguette_; Sp. _bragueta_--L. _braca_, _bracæ_, breeches.]

BRACKISH, brak'ish, _adj._ saltish: applied to water mixed with salt or
with sea-water.--_n._ BRACK'ISHNESS. [Dut. _brak_, brackish; prob. the same
as _brak_, refuse.]

BRACT, brakt, _n._ an irregularly developed leaf at the base of the
flower-stalk.--_adjs._ BRAC'TEAL, BRAC'TEATE, BRACT'ED, BRAC'TEOLATE.--_n._
BRAC'TEOLE, a little bract at the base of the stalk of a single flower
which is itself on a main stalk supporting several flowers.--_adj._
BRACT'LESS, destitute of bracts. [L. _bractea_, a thin plate of metal,
gold-leaf.]

BRAD, brad, _n._ a small nail having a slight projection at the top on one
side instead of a head.--_n._ BRAD'AWL, an awl to pierce holes. [Scot.
_brod_, an instrument for pricking with; Ice. _broddr_, a pointed piece of
iron.]

BRADYPEPTIC, brad-i-pep'tik, _adj._ slow of digestion. [Gr. _bradys_, slow,
and PEPTIC.]

BRAE, br[=a], _n._ (_Scot._) the slope above a river bank, a hill-slope.
[Scand. _brá_.]

BRAG, brag, _v.i._ to boast or bluster:--_pr.p._ brag'ging; _pa.p._
bragged.--_n._ a boast or boasting: the thing boasted of: a game at cards,
very like poker.--_adj._ BRAG'GING.--_advs._ BRAG'GINGLY, BRAG'LY
(_Spens._). [Most prob. Celt.; cf. W. _bragio_, to boast; Ir. _bragaim_.
The Fr. _braguer_, to brag, and _bragard_, a braggart, are not the parents
of the Eng. word.]

BRAGGADOCIO, brag-a-d[=o]'shi-o, _n._ and _adj._ a braggart or boaster:
empty boasting. [From _Braggadochio_, a boastful character in Spenser's
_Faerie Queene_.]

BRAGGART, brag'art, _adj._ boastful.--_n._ a vain boaster.--_n._
BRAGG'ARDISM (_Shak._), boastfulness. [Fr. _bragard_, vain, bragging; prob.
of Celt. origin; Diez prefers Scand., and quotes Sw. _brak_, Dan. _brag_,
&c.]

BRAHMAN, brä'man, BRAHMIN, brä'min, _n._ a person of the highest or
priestly caste among the Hindus.--_adjs._ BRAHMAN'IC, -AL, BRAHMIN'IC, -AL,
BRAH'MINEE, appropriated to the Brahmans.--_ns._ BRAH'MANISM, BRAH'MINISM,
one of the religions of India, the worship of Brahma. [From _Brahma_, the
supreme post-Vedic Hindu deity.]

BRAID, br[=a]d, _v.t._ to plait or entwine.--_n._ cord, or other texture
made by plaiting.--_p.adj._ BRAID'ED, plaited, embroidered, trimmed with
braid.--_n._ BRAID'ING, the act of making braids: embroidery with braid.
[A.S. _bregdan_; Ice. _bregða_, to weave.]

BRAID, br[=a]d, _adj._ (_Shak._) dissembling, deceitful. [A.S. _brægd_,
falsehood, from _bregdan_, _brægd_, to weave.]

BRAID, br[=a]d, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to upbraid, to reproach. [Prob. from
_Abraid_, or BRAID (1).]

BRAIDISM, br[=a]d'ism, _n._ mesmerism or hypnotism. [From Dr James _Braid_,
who practised it about 1842.]

BRAIL, br[=a]l, _n._ a piece of leather to bind up a hawk's wing: (_pl._)
the feathers about a hawk's rump: (_naut._) one of the ropes used to truss
up a sail.--_v.t._ to haul in, as a sail, by pulling upon the brails. [O.
Fr. _brail_--L. _bracale_, a waist-belt for holding up the
breeches--_bracæ_.]

BRAILLE, br[=a]l, _n._ and _adj._ a kind of type for the blind, having
arbitrary signs consisting of varying combinations of six points arranged
thus ([Braille pattern]), there being sixty-two possible combinations of
these six points. [From Louis _Braille_, the inventor.]

BRAIN, br[=a]n, _n._ the term applied to that part of the central nervous
system which in vertebrated animals is contained within the cranium or
skull, and in the invertebrata, to the nervous ganglia near the head end of
the body: the seat of the intellect and of sensation: the
intellect.--_v.t._ to dash out the brains of: (_Shak._) to conceive
of.--_n._ BRAIN'-COR'AL, the popular name of certain kinds of coral, so
called from their general resemblance to a brain.--_p.adj._ BRAINED, having
brains.--_n._ BRAIN'-FE'VER, a loose popular term which includes congestion
of the brain and its membranes, delirium tremens, and inflammation of the
brain substance itself.--_adjs._ BRAIN'ISH (_Shak._), brain-sick,
hot-headed, furious; BRAIN'LESS, without brains or understanding:
silly.--_n._ BRAIN'-PAN, the skull.--_adj._ BRAIN'-SICK, diseased in the
understanding, deranged.--_adv._ BRAIN'SICK'LY (_Shak._).--_n._
BRAIN'-SICK'NESS. [A.S. _brægn_; Dut. _brein_, prov. Ger. _bregen_]

BRAIRD, br[=a]rd, _n._ the first shoots of corn or other crop.--_v.i._ to
appear above ground. [Orig. _Scot._; A.S. _brerd_, the edge, and _brord_, a
point.]

BRAISE, br[=a]z, _v.t._ to stew meat together with slices of bacon, &c.,
properly with a charcoal fire above and below the braising-pan.--_p.adj._
BRAISED. [Fr. _braiser_.]

BRAKE, br[=a]k, obsolete, _pa.t._ of BREAK.

BRAKE, br[=a]k, _n._ a fern: a place overgrown with ferns or briers; a
thicket.--_adj._ BRAK'Y. [A doublet of BRACKEN; ety. dub.]

BRAKE, br[=a]k, _n._ an instrument to break flax or hemp: a harrow: a
contrivance for retarding by friction the speed of carriages, wagons,
trains, or revolving drums.--_adj._ BRAKE'LESS, without a brake.--_ns._
BRAKE'MAN, the man whose business it is to manage the brake of a
railway-train; BRAKE'-VAN, the carriage wherein the brake is worked;
BRAKE'-WHEEL, the wheel to which a brake is applied. [From root of BREAK;
cf. Dut. _braak_, a flax-brake.]

BRAKE, br[=a]k, _n._ a handle, as of a pump: a lever for working a machine.
[Prob. through O. Fr. _brac_, from L. _brachium_, an arm.]

BRAMAH-PRESS, brä'ma-pres, _n._ a hydraulic press invented by Joseph
_Bramah_ of London (1748-1814), inventor also of the BRAMAH-LOCK, &c.

BRAMBLE, bram'bl, _n._ a wild prickly shrub bearing blackberries, a
blackberry bush: any rough prickly shrub.--_ns._ BRAM'BLE-BERR'Y,
BRAM'BLE-BUSH, a collection of brambles growing together; BRAM'BLE-FINCH,
BRAM'BLING, a bird nearly allied to the chaffinch.--_adj._ BRAM'BLY. [A.S.
_brémel_; Dut. _braam_, Ger. _brom-beere_.]

BRAME, br[=a]m, _n._ (_Spens._) sharp passion, longing. [It. _brama_.]

BRAN, bran, _n._ the refuse of grain: the inner husks of corn sifted from
the flour: the coarser part of anything.--_n._ BRAN'FULNESS.--_adj._
BRAN'NY. [O. Fr. _bran_, bran; prob. Celt.]

BRANCARD, brank'ard, _n._ a horse litter. [Fr.]

BRANCH, bransh, _n._ a shoot or arm-like limb of a tree: anything like a
limb of a tree: any offshoot or subdivision, a section or department of a
subject: any subordinate division of a business, &c., as a branch-bank or
pawn-shop.--_v.t._ to divide into branches.--_v.i._ to spread out as a
branch (with _out_, _off_, _from_).--_adj._ BRANCHED.--_ns._ BRANCH'ER, a
young hawk or other bird when it leaves the nest and begins to take to the
branches; BRANCH'ERY, branches collectively.--_adjs._ BRANCH'ING, furnished
with or shooting out branches; BRANCH'LESS.--_ns._ BRANCH'LET, a little
branch; BRANCH'-P[=I]'LOT, one who holds the Trinity House certificate;
BRANCH'-WORK, ornamental figured patterns.--_adj._ BRANCH'Y.--ROOT AND
BRANCH, thoroughly--used also adjectively, as in a 'root-and-branch'
policy. [Fr. _branche_--Low L. _branca_, a beast's paw--L. _brachium_.]

BRANCHIÆ, brangk'i-[=e], _n.pl._ gills.--_adjs._ BRANCH'IAL; BRANCH'IATE,
furnished with branchiæ.--_n._ BRANCHIOP'ODA, a sub-order of Crustaceans in
the order with leaf-like feet (Phyllopods), to which the gills are
attached. [L.--Gr.]

BRAND, brand, _n._ a piece of wood burning or partly burned: a mark burned
into anything with a hot iron: a trade-mark, made by burning or otherwise,
as on casks: a particular sort of goods, from the trade-marks by which they
are known, as cigars, &c.: a sword, so called from its glitter: a mark of
infamy: a general name for the fungoid diseases or blights of grain
crops--_bunt_, _mildew_, _rust_, and _smut_.--_v.t._ to burn or mark with a
hot iron: to fix a mark of infamy upon.--_adj._ BRAND'ED.--_n._ BRAND'ER, a
gridiron.--_v.t._ to cook on the gridiron, as beef-steaks.--_p.adjs._
BRAND'ERED, BRAND'ERING.--_ns._ BRAND'ING-[=I]'RON, BRAND'-[=I]'RON, an
iron to brand with: a trivet or tripod to set a pot or kettle upon:
(_Spens._) a sword--also BRAND'ISE, a trivet; BRAND'LING, a red worm used
by anglers, found commonly in tan-pits.--_adj._ BRAND'-NEW, quite new (as
if newly from the fire).--_n._ BRAND'RETH, a stand of wood for a cask or
hayrick, a rail round a well.--A BRAND FROM THE BURNING, one snatched out
of a pressing danger--from Amos, iv. 11. [A.S. _brand_, _brond_, from root
of BURN.]

BRANDISH, brand'ish, _v.t._ to wave or flourish as a brand or weapon.--_n._
a waving or flourish. [Fr. _brandissant_--_brandir_, from root of BRAND.]

BRANDY, brand'i, _n._ an ardent spirit distilled from wine.--_adj._
BRAN'DIED, heartened or strengthened with brandy.--_n._ BRAND'Y-PAWNEE',
brandy and water. [Formerly _brandwine_--Dut. _brandewijn_--_branden_, to
burn, to distil, and _wijn_, wine; cf. Ger. _branntwein_.]

BRANGLE, brang'l, _v.i._ (_arch._) to wrangle, squabble.--_n._ (_obs._) a
brawl.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ BRAND'LE, to shake, cause to waver: to
waver.--_n._ BRANG'LING, disputing. [Prob. the two words are the same; Fr.
_branler_.]

BRANK, brangk, _n._ buckwheat. [Prob. Celt.; cf. L. _brance_, a Gallic name
of a white kind of corn.]

BRANK, brangk, _v.i._ to prance, toss the head: to strut or
swagger.--_adj._ BRANK'Y (_Scot._), showy. [Prob. a variant of PRANK.]

[Illustration]

BRANKS, brangks, _n._ (seldom in _sing._) a scold's bridle, having a hinged
iron framework to enclose the head and a bit or gag to fit into the mouth
and compress the tongue. [Scot.; ety. very obscure; cf. M. E. _bernak_,
whence BARNACLE and BRAKE; Ger. _pranger_, the pillory, Dut. _prang_, a
fetter; the Gael. _brangus_, _brangas_, is most prob. borrowed.]

BRANKURSINE, brangk'ur-sin, _n._ the plant Acanthus, called also
_Bear's-breech_. [Low L. _branca_, _ursina_, a bear's paw.]

BRAN-NEW, bran'-n[=u], _adj._ corruption of BRAND-NEW.

BRANSLE, bran'sl, _n._ (_obs._) a dance: a song for dance music. [Fr.]

BRANT-GOOSE. See BRENT-GOOSE.

BRANTLE, bran'tl, _n._ a kind of dance.

BRASERO. Same as BRAZIER (q.v. under BRAZE).

BRASH, brash, _n._ broken and angular fragments of rock which occasionally
form the basement bed of alluvial deposits: fragments of crushed ice:
clippings of hedges or trees.--_adj._ BRASH'Y. [Prob. Fr. _brèche_.]

BRASH, brash, _n._ a slight attack of illness: an eructation or belching of
acid water from the stomach--water-brash: a sudden burst of rain: (_obs._)
an attack.--_v.t._ to disturb. [Scot.; prob. onomatopoeic.]

BRASS, bräs, _n._ an alloy of copper and zinc: (_fig._) impudence: money in
cash: a monumental plate of brass inlaid on slabs of stone in the pavements
of ancient churches.--_n.pl._ BRASS'ARTS, the brass pieces which, in plate
armour, protected the upper part of the arms, and united the shoulder and
elbow pieces.--_ns._ BRASS'-BAND, a band or company of musicians who
perform on brass instruments; BRASS'ET, a casque or armour covering for the
head: a helmet; BRASS'FOUND'ER, a maker of articles in brass.--_adjs._
BRASS'-PAVED (_Spens._), durable, as if paved with brass; BRASS'-VIS'AGED,
brazen-faced, impudent.--_n._ BRASS'Y, a wooden golf-club with a brass
sole.--_adj._ of or like brass: impudent: unfeeling: pitiless: harsh in
tone. [A.S. _braes_; prob. related to Sw. _brasa_, fire.]

BRASSERIE, bras'er-[=e], _n._ in France, any beer garden or saloon. [Fr.]

BRASSICA, bras'i-ka, _n._ the turnip and cabbage genus of Cruciferæ. [L.]

BRAST. Same as BURST.

BRAT, brat, _n._ a contemptuous name for a child, as in 'beggar's brat:'
any over-garment of coarse cloth, a child's pinafore, an apron.--_n._
BRAT'CHET, a little brat--better BRAT'LING. [A.S. _bratt_; of Celtic
origin, Old Ir. _brat_, a plaid, Gael. _brat_, an apron.]

BRATTICE, brat'is, _n._ a wooden partition, as in the shaft of a coal-pit,
&c.--_v.t._ to line with wood the sides of a shaft, &c.--_n._
BRATT'ICE-CLOTH, strong tarred cloth used in mines in place of wooden
bratticing. [O. Fr. _breteske_--Low L. _bretachia_; prob. Teut.]

BRATTLING, brat'ling, _n._ a clattering noise: quarrel: tumult--also
BRAT'TLE.--_v.i._ BRAT'TLE, to make a clattering noise. [Onomatopoeic.]

BRAVADO, brav-[=a]'do, or brav-ä'do, _n._ a display of bravery: a boastful
threat: a swaggerer:--_pl._ BRAV[=A]'DOES.--_v.i._ to play the bravado.
[Sp. _bravada_. See BRAVE.]

BRAVE, br[=a]v, _adj._ daring, courageous: noble: finely dressed, showy,
handsome (Scot. BRAW): a general word for excellent, capital.--_v.t._ to
meet boldly: to defy.--_n._ (_obs._) a bully, a hired assassin: a brave
soldier, esp. among the North American Indians: (_arch._) bravado:
(_arch._) bravo.--_adv._ BRAVE'LY (Scot. BRAW'LY), excellently, well.--_n._
BRAV'ERY, courage: heroism: finery, showy dress. [Fr. _brave_; It. and Sp.
_bravo_; prob. from Celt., as in Bret. _braga_, to strut about, Gael.
_breagh_, fine. See BRAG.]

BRAVO, bräv'o, _n._ a daring villain: a hired assassin:--_pl._ BRAVOES
(bräv'[=o]z). [It. and Sp.]

BRAVO, bräv'o, _interj._ well done: excellent. [It.]

BRAVURA, bräv-[=oo]r'a, _n._ (_mus._) a term applied to a florid air or
song with difficult and rapid passages requiring great spirit and dash in
execution. [It.]

BRAWL, brawl, _n._ a noisy quarrel.--_v.i._ to quarrel noisily: to murmur
or gurgle.--_n._ BRAWL'ING, the act of quarrelling noisily.--_adj._
quarrelsome: noisy. [M. E. _brallen_, of doubtful origin; prob. cog. with
Dut. _brallen_, Ger. _prahlen_, to boast.]

BRAWL, brawl, _n._ a kind of French dance. [Fr. _braule_.]

BRAWN, brawn, _n._ muscle, esp. of the arm or calf of the leg: thick flesh:
muscular strength: a boar: a preparation of meat made from pig's head and
ox-feet, cut up, boiled, and pickled.--_adj._ BRAWNED.--_n._ BRAWN'INESS,
quality of being brawny: muscularity.--_adj._ BRAWN'Y, fleshy: muscular:
strong. [O. Fr. _braon_, from Old Ger. _brato_, flesh (for roasting), Old
Ger. _brâto_ (Ger. _braten_), to roast.]

BRAXY, brak'si, _n._ and _adj._ a Scotch name loosely used for several
totally different disorders of sheep.--BRAXY MUTTON, the flesh of a braxy
sheep; also, generally, of any sheep that has died of disease or accident.
[Prob. the original form is _bracks_, the sing. of which is a variant of
BREAK.]

BRAY, br[=a], _v.t._ to break, pound, or grind small, as in a mortar.--_n._
BRAY'ER, an instrument to grind or spread ink in printing. [O. Fr. _breier_
(Fr. _broyer_); It. _brigare_.]

BRAY, br[=a], _n._ the cry of the ass: any harsh grating sound.--_v.i._ to
cry like an ass: to give forth harsh sounds, esp. of the trumpet.--_ns._
BRAY'ER, one who brays like an ass; BRAY'ING, the noise of an ass: any
harsh noise.--_adj._ making a harsh noise. [O. Fr. _brai_, _brait_;
_braire_--Low L. _bragire_, prob. of Celt. origin.]

BRAZE, br[=a]z, _v.t._ to solder with an alloy of brass and zinc.--_adj._
BR[=A]'ZEN, of or belonging to brass: impudent.--_v.t._ to face or confront
with impudence--as in 'to brazen it out.'--_n._ BR[=A]'ZEN-FACE, one having
a brazen or impudent face: one remarkable for impudence.--_adj._
BR[=A]'ZEN-FACED, impudent.--_adv._ BR[=A]'ZENLY.--_ns._ BR[=A]'ZENNESS,
BR[=A]'ZENRY, effrontery; BR[=A]'ZIER, BR[=A]'SIER, a pan for holding
burning coals--also BRAS'ERO; BR[=A]Z'ING, soldering. [O. Fr. _braser_, to
burn; most prob. related to BRASS.]

BRAZIER, br[=a]'zi-[.e]r, _n._ one who works in BRASS (q.v.).

BRAZIL, bra-zil', _n._ usually BRAZIL'-WOOD, the hard reddish wood of an
East Indian tree, known as sappan, used in dyeing.--_n._ BRAZIL'IAN, a
native of Brazil, in South America.--_adj._ belonging to Brazil.--_n._
BRAZIL'-NUT, the edible seed of a large tree, native of Brazil. [O. Fr.
_bresil_ (Sp. _brasil_, It. _brasile_)--Low L. _brasilium_, a red dye-wood,
brought from the East, itself prob. a corr. of some Oriental word. When a
similar wood was discovered in South America the country became known as
_terra de brasil_, land of red dye-wood, whence _Brasil_, Brazil.]

BREACH, br[=e]ch, _n._ a break or opening, as in the walls of a fortress: a
breaking of law, &c., violation of contract, covenant, promise, &c.: a
quarrel: a broken condition or part of anything, a break: a gap in a
fortification--hence 'to stand in the breach,' often used figuratively: a
break in a coast-line, bay, harbour, creek (Judges, v. 17).--_v.t._ to make
a breach or opening in a wall, &c.--BREACH OF PROMISE, often used simply
for breach of promise of marriage; BREACH OF THE PEACE, a violation of the
public peace by riot or the like. [A.S. _bryce_, _brice_; related to
BREAK.]

BREAD, bred, _n._ food made of flour or meal baked: food:
livelihood.--_ns._ BREAD'-BAS'KET, a basket for holding bread: (_slang_)
the stomach; BREAD'-CHIP'PER (_Shak._), one who chips bread, an
under-butler; BREAD'-CORN, corn of which bread is made.--_n.pl._
BREAD'-CRUMBS, bread crumbled down for dressing dishes of fried fish,
&c.--_n._ BREAD'FRUIT-TREE, a tree of the South Sea Islands, producing a
fruit which, when roasted, forms a good substitute for bread; BREAD'-NUT,
the fruit of a tree, a native of Jamaica, closely allied to the
breadfruit-tree, which is used as bread when boiled or roasted;
BREAD'-ROOM, an apartment in a ship's hold where the bread is kept;
BREAD'-ROOT, a herbaceous perennial plant of North America, with a
carrot-like root which is used as food; BREAD'-STUD'Y, any branch of study
taken up as a means of gaining a living; BREAD'-STUFF, the various kinds of
grain or flour of which bread is made; BREAD'-TREE, a tree of South Africa
which has a great deal of starch in its stem, and is used as bread by the
natives; BREAD'-WIN'NER, one who earns a living for a family.--BREAD
BUTTERED ON BOTH SIDES, very fortunate circumstances.--TO TAKE THE BREAD
OUT OF ONE'S MOUTH, to deprive of the means of living. [A.S. _bréad_, prob.
from a Teut. root meaning a fragment, like the Scot. and Norse country use
of 'a _piece_,' for a bit of bread. The usual A.S. word was _hláf_.]

BREADED, bred'ed, _pa.p._ (_Spens._) = BRAIDED.

BREADTH, bredth, _n._ extent from side to side: width: a style in painting
in which details are strictly subordinated to the harmony of the whole
composition.--_adv._ BREADTH'WAYS, broadside on. [A.S. _br['æ]du_; Ger.
_briete_. See BROAD.]

BREAK, br[=a]k, _v.t._ to part by force: to shatter: to crush: to tame, or
wear out: to violate, or outrage, as a law, a bargain, &c.: to check by
intercepting, as a fall: to interrupt, as silence, or the monotony of
anything, or in 'to break one off a habit:' to make bankrupt: to degrade
from rank, as an officer.--_v.i._ to part in two: to burst forth: to open
or appear, as the morning: to become bankrupt: to crack or give way, as the
voice: to dissolve, as frost: to collapse in foam, as a wave: to fall out,
as with a friend:--_pa.t._ br[=o]ke; _pa.p._ br[=o]k'en.--_n._ the state of
being broken: an opening: a pause or interruption: (_billiards_) a
consecutive series of successful strokes, also the number of points
attained by such: the dawn.--_ns._ BREAK'AGE, the action of breaking, or
its consequences: an interruption; BREAK'-DOWN, a dance, vigorous rather
than graceful, in which much noise is made by the feet of the one
performer; BREAK'ER, a wave broken on rocks or the shore.--_adj._
BREAK'-NECK, likely to cause a broken neck.--_ns._ BREAK'-PROM'ISE,
BREAK'-VOW, one who makes a practice of breaking his promise or vow;
BREAK'WATER, a barrier to break the force of the waves.--BREAK A JEST, to
utter a jest unexpectedly; BREAK A LANCE WITH, to enter into a contest with
a rival; BREAK AWAY, to go away abruptly, as from prison, &c.: to be
scattered, as clouds after a storm; BREAK BULK, to open the hold and take
out a portion of the cargo; BREAK COVER, to burst forth from concealment,
as a fox; BREAK DOWN, to crush down or level: to collapse, to fail
completely; BREAK FORTH, to burst out, issue; BREAK GROUND, to commence
digging or excavation: to begin; BREAK IN, to train to labour, as a horse;
BREAK IN, IN UPON, or INTO, to enter violently or unexpectedly, to
interpose abruptly in a conversation, &c.; BREAK LOOSE, to extricate one's
self forcibly: to break through all restraint; BREAK NEWS, to make anything
known, esp. of bad news, with caution and delicacy; BREAK OFF, to separate
by breaking, put an end to; BREAK OUT, to appear suddenly: to break through
all restraint; BREAK SHEER (said of a ship riding at anchor), to be forced
by wind or tide out of a position clear of the anchor; BREAK THE HEART, to
destroy with grief; BREAK THE ICE (_fig._), to get through first
difficulties: BREAK UP, to break open; BREAK UPON THE WHEEL, to punish by
stretching a criminal on a wheel and breaking his bones; BREAK WIND, to
void wind from the stomach; BREAK WITH, to fail out, as friends may do.
[A.S. _brecan_; Ger. _brechen_.]

BREAK, BRAKE, br[=a]k, _n._ a large wagonette: a carriage frame, all wheels
and no body, used in breaking in horses. [BREAK, _v.t._]

BREAKER, br[=a]k'[.e]r, _n._ a small water-cask, used on shipboard. [Prob.
a corr. of Sp. _bareca_, a barrel.]

BREAKFAST, brek'fast, _n._ a break or breaking of a fast: the first meal of
the day.--_v.i._ to take breakfast.--_v.t._ to furnish with
breakfast.--_ns._ BREAK'FASTING, the act of taking breakfast: a party at
breakfast; BREAK'FAST-SET, the china or other ware used at breakfast.

BREAM, br[=e]m, _n._ a small fresh-water fish nearly allied to the bleak: a
family of sea-breams or Sparidæ. [O. Fr. _bresme_ (Fr. _brême_)--Old Ger.
_brahsema_ (mod. Ger. _brassen_).]

BREAM, br[=e]m, _v.t._ to clean, as a ship's bottom, by burning off
seaweed, shells, &c. [Prob. conn. with BROOM, Dut. _brem_.]

BREARE, BRERE, br[=e]r, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as BRIER.

BREAST, brest, _n._ the forepart of the human body between the neck and the
belly: one of the two mammary glands in women, forming soft protuberances
on the chest: the corresponding part of any animal: (_fig._) conscience,
disposition, affections.--_v.t._ to bear the breast against: to oppose
manfully: to mount.--_n._ BREAST'-BONE, the bone running down the middle of
the breast, to which the first seven ribs are attached.--_adv._
BREAST'-DEEP, deep, as up to the breast.--_adj._ BREAST'ED, having a
breast.--_adv._ BREAST'-HIGH, high as the breast--_ns._ BREAST'-KNOT, a
knot of ribbons worn on the breast; BREAST'PIN, an ornamental pin for the
breast; BREAST'PLATE, a plate or piece of armour for the breast: (_B._) an
embroidered square of linen worn on the breast of the Jewish high-priest,
bearing twelve precious stones, each inscribed with the name of one of the
tribes of Israel; BREAST'-PLOUGH, a kind of spade for cutting turf, with a
cross-bar against which the breast is pressed; BREAST'RAIL, the upper rail
of a breastwork; BREAST'SUMMER, BRES'SUMMER, a summer or beam supporting
the whole front of a building in the same way as a lintel supports the
portion over an opening; BREAST'-WALL, a retaining wall; BREAST'-WHEEL, a
water-wheel which is turned by water delivered upon it at about half its
height; BREAST'WORK, a hastily constructed earthwork.--TO MAKE A CLEAN
BREAST OF, to make a full confession. [A.S. _bréost_; Ger. _brust_, Dut.
_borst_.]

BREATH, breth, _n._ the air drawn into and then expelled from the lungs:
power of breathing: life: the time occupied by once breathing: a very
slight breeze.--_adjs._ BREATH'FUL (_Spens._), full of breath or air, also
full of scent or odour; BREATH'LESS, out of breath: dead: excessively
eager, as if holding one's breath from excitement.--_n._
BREATH'LESSNESS.--TO CATCH THE BREATH, to stop breathing for an instant; TO
SPEND ONE'S BREATH, as in profitless talk; TO TAKE BREATH, to recover
freedom of breathing; WITH BATED BREATH, with breath restrained from
reverence or fear. [A.S. _br[/æ]th_; Ger. _brodem_, steam, breath.]

BREATHE, br[=e]_th_, _v.i._ to draw in and expel breath or air from the
lungs: to take breath, to rest or pause: to live.--_v.t._ to draw in and
expel from the lungs, as air: to infuse: to give out as breath: to utter by
the breath or softly, to whisper: to express: to keep in breath, to
exercise: to tire by some brisk exercise.--_ns._ BREATH'ER, one who
breathes or lives: a spell of exercise; BREATH'ING, the act of breathing:
aspiration, secret prayer: respite.--_adj._ life-like.--_ns._
BREATH'ING-TIME, time to breathe or rest; BREATH'ING-WHILE, time sufficient
for drawing breath: any very short period.--TO BREATHE AGAIN, to be
relieved from an anxiety; TO BREATHE FREELY, to be at ease; TO BREATHE
UPON, to tarnish or soil. [See BREATH.]

BRECCIA, brech'ya, _n._ a conglomerate rock composed of angular and unworn
fragments, cemented together by lime or other mineral substance.--_adj._
BRECCIATED (brech'y[=a]t-ed), noting rocks composed of breccia, [It.; cf.
Fr. _brèche_, breach, flint pebble.]

BRED, bred, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BREED.

BREDE, br[=e]d, _n._ an obsolete form of BRAID.

BREE, br[=e], _n._ the eyebrow. [Still in Scot.; A.S. _br['æ]w_, _bréaw_;
cf. Ger. (_augen_)_braue_.]

BREE, br[=e], _n._ the liquor in which anything has been
boiled--_barley-bree_. [A.S. _briw_; cf. Ger. _brei_.]

BREECH, br[=e]ch, _n._ the lower part of the body behind: the hinder part
of anything, esp. of a gun.--_v.t._ to put into breeches: to flog.--_adj._
BREECHED.--_n.pl._ BREECHES (brich'ez), a garment worn by men on the lower
limbs of the body, strictly, as distinguished from trousers, coming just
below the knee, but often used generally for trousers--(KNEE-BREECHES, see
under KNEE).--_n._ BREECH'ING, a part of a horse's harness attached to the
saddle, which comes round the breech and is hooked to the shafts: a strong
rope attached to the breech of a gun to secure it to a ship's side.--_adj._
(_Shak._) subject to whipping.--_n._ BREECH'-LOAD'ER, a firearm loaded by
introducing the charge at the breech instead of the muzzle.--BREECHES
BIBLE, a name often given to the Geneva Bible produced by the English
Protestant exiles in 1560, so named from the rendering 'breeches' in Gen.
iii. 7; BREECHES PART (_theat._), a part in which a girl wears men's
clothes.--TO WEAR THE BREECHES, (said of a wife), to usurp the authority of
the husband: to be master. [A.S. _bréc_; found in all Teut. languages; cf.
Ger. _bruch_, Dut. _brock_.]

BREED, br[=e]d, _v.t._ to generate or bring forth: to train or bring up: to
cause or occasion.--_v.i._ to be with young: to produce offspring: to be
produced or brought forth:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bred.--_n._ that which is
bred, progeny or offspring: kind or race.--_ns._ BREED'-BATE (_Shak._), one
who is constantly breeding or producing debate or strife; BREED'ER, one who
breeds or brings up; BREED'ING, act of producing: education or
manners.--BREEDING IN-AND-IN, pairing of similar forms: marrying always
among near relations. [A.S. _brédan_, to cherish, keep warm; Ger. _brüten_,
to hatch.]

BREEKS, br[=e]ks, _n.pl._ (_Scot._) breeches, trousers.

BREER, BRERE, br[=e]r, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to sprout.

BREEZE, br[=e]z, _n._ a gentle gale: a wind: a disturbance or quarrel: a
whispered rumour.--_adjs._ BREEZE'LESS, without a breeze: motionless;
BREEZ'Y, fanned with or subject to breezes.--TO BREEZE UP, to freshen into
a breeze. [Old Sp. _briza_, It. _brezza_ (Fr. _brise_, a cold wind).]

BREEZE, br[=e]z, _n._ (_Shak._) the gadfly.--Also written BREESE, BRIZE.
[A.S. _briosa_.]

BREGMA, breg'ma, _n._ the part of the skull where the frontal and the two
parietal bones join--sometimes divided into the right and left
bregmata.--_adj._ BREGMAT'IC. [Gr.]

BREHON, br[=e]'hon, _n._ an ancient Irish judge.--BREHON LAWS, the name
given by the English to the system of jurisprudence which prevailed among
the native Irish from an early period till towards the middle of the 17th
century. [Ir. _breitheamh_, pl. _breitheamhuin_.]

BRELOQUE, bre-lok', _n._ an ornament attached to a watch-chain. [Fr.]

BREME, BREEM, br[=e]m, _adj._ (_Spens._) fiery, stern, boisterous, sharp.
[Prob. related to A.S. _bréman_, to rage.]

BREN, bren, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to burn.--_pa.p._ and _adj._ BRENT. [See
BURN.]

BRENT, brent, _adj._ (_Scot._) lofty: smooth, unwrinkled. [A.S. _brant_,
steep; cog. with Ice. _brattr_.]

BRENT-GOOSE, brent'-g[=oo]s, _n._ a small species of wild goose, having the
head, neck, long wing feathers, and tail black, the belly white, the rest
slaty-gray--it visits the British coasts in winter.--Also BRANT'-GOOSE, or
BRENT BARNACLE, and often confounded with the barnacle goose. [Prob.
_branded_ = brindled.]

BRESSUMMER. Same as BREASTSUMMER (q.v. under BREAST).

BRETHREN, bre_th_'ren, _pl._ of BROTHER (q.v.).

BRETON, bret'un, _adj._ belonging to Brittany or _Bretagne_, in France.

BRETTICE. Same as BRATTICE.

BRETWALDA, bret-wal'da, _n._ a title of supremacy applied by the
_Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ to Egbert and seven earlier kings, whose
superiority was more or less acknowledged by other kings. [Lit. 'Lord of
the _Britons_,' or 'of Britain.']

BREVE, br[=e]v, _n._ a pope's letter: the longest note now used in music,
[Breve]. [It. _breve_--L. _brevis_, short.]

BREVET, brev'et, _n._ a military commission entitling an officer to take
rank above that for which he receives pay.--_n._ BREVET'CY, the condition
of one holding brevet rank. [Fr.--L. _brevis_, short.]

BREVIARY, br[=e]v'i-ar-i, _n._ book containing the daily service of the
R.C. Church. [Fr. _bréviaire_--L. _brevis_, short.]

BREVIATE, br[=e]'vi-[=a]t, _n._ a short compendium: a lawyer's brief. [L.
_brevi[=a]tus_--_brevi[=a]re_, to shorten--_brevis_, short.]

BREVIER, brev-[=e]r', _n._ a small type between bourgeois and minion,
originally used in printing breviaries.

BREVITY, brev'it-i, _n._ shortness: conciseness. [L. _brevitas_--_brevis_,
short.]

BREW, br[=oo], _v.t._ to prepare a liquor, as from malt and other
materials: to contrive or plot.--_v.i._ to perform the operation of brewing
ale or beer: to be gathering or forming.--_ns._ BREW'AGE, something brewed:
mixed liquor; BREW'ER, one who brews; BREW'ERY, BREW'-HOUSE, a place for
brewing; BREW'ING, the act of making liquor from malt: the quantity brewed
at once; BREW'STER (now only _Scot._), a brewer. [A.S. _bréowan_; cf. Ger.
_brauen_.]

BRIAR. Same as BRIER (1).

BRIAREAN, br[=i]-[=a]'re-an, _adj._ relating to _Briareus_, a
hundred-handed giant: hence many-handed. [Gr.--_briaros_, strong.]

BRIAR-ROOT. See BRIER (2).

BRIBE, br[=i]b, _n._ something given to influence unduly the judgment or
corrupt the conduct: allurement.--_v.t._ to influence by a bribe: to gain
over.--_v.i._ to practise bribery.--_ns._ BRIB'ER, one who bribes;
BRIB'ERY, the act of giving or taking bribes; BRIB'ERY-OATH, an oath taken
by an elector that he has not been bribed. [O. Fr. _bribe_, a lump of
bread; origin dub.]

BRIC-À-BRAC, brik'a-brak, _n._ old curiosities, or other articles of value.
[Acc. to Littré, formed after the phrase _de bric et de broc_, 'by hook and
by crook.']

BRICK, brik, _n._ an oblong or square piece of burned clay: a loaf of bread
in the shape of a brick: (_slang_) a reliable friend, a good
fellow.--_v.t._ to lay or pave with brick.--_ns._ BRICK'BAT, a piece of
brick; BRICK'CLAY, a clay used in making bricks; BRICK'-DUST, dust made by
pounding bricks, a colour like that of brick-dust; BRICK'-EARTH, earth used
in making bricks; BRICK'-FIELD, a place where bricks are made; BRICK'-KILN,
a kiln in which bricks are burned; BRICK'LAYER, one who lays or builds with
bricks; BRICK'LAYING; BRICK'MAKER, one whose trade is to make bricks;
BRICK'-TEA, tea pressed into cakes; BRICK'-WORK, a structure formed of
bricks.--LIKE A BRICK, with good-will. [Fr. _brique_, from root of BREAK.]

BRICKLE, brik'l, _adj._ (_Spens._ and _Scot._) apt to break: weak:
troublesome. [Older form of BRITTLE.]

BRICOLE, brik'el, or brik-[=o]l', _n._ an ancient engine for throwing
stones: the rebound of a ball from the wall of a tennis-court, an indirect
stroke. [Fr.--Low L. _briccola_.]

BRIDAL, br[=i]d'al, _n._ a marriage feast: a wedding.--_adj._ belonging to
a bride or a wedding: nuptial. [BRIDE, and ALE, a feast.]

BRIDE, br[=i]d, _n._ a woman about to be married: a woman newly
married.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to act the bride.--_ns._ BRIDE'-ALE
(_obs._)--BRIDAL, the ale-drinking at a marriage feast; BRIDE'-BED, the
marriage bed; BRIDE'CAKE, the bride's cake, or cake distributed at a
wedding; BRIDE'-CHAM'BER, a nuptial apartment; BRIDE'GROOM, a man about to
be married: a man newly married; BRIDE'MAID, BRIDE'S'-MAID, BRIDE'MAN,
BRIDE'S'-MAN, young unmarried people who attend the bride and bridegroom at
a wedding. [A.S. _brýd_; Ice. _brúdr_, Ger. _braut_, a bride.]

BRIDEWELL, br[=i]d'wel, _n._ a house of correction: a gaol. [From a palace
near St _Bride's Well_ in London.]

BRIDGE, brij, _n._ a structure raised across a river, &c., or anything like
such: the narrow raised platform whence the captain of a steamer gives
directions: a thin upright piece of wood supporting the strings in a violin
or similar instrument.--_v.t._ to build a bridge over.--_n._ BRIDGE'-HEAD,
a fortification covering the end of a bridge nearest to the enemy's
position.--_adj._ BRIDGE'LESS, without a bridge.--_n._ BRIDGE'-OF-BOATS, a
bridge resting on boats moored abreast across a piece of water. [A.S.
_brycg_; Ger. _brucke_, Ice. _bryggja_.]

BRIDGE, brich, _n._ a modification of whist in which the dealer does not
turn up the last card, but has the option (which he may pass to his
partner) of declaring which suit shall be trumps.

BRIDLE, br[=i]'-dl, _n._ the apparatus on a horse's head, by which it is
controlled: any curb or restraint: a gesture expressing pride or
vanity.--_v.t._ to put on or manage by a bridle: to check or
restrain.--_v.i._ to hold up the head proudly or affectedly.--_ns._
BR[=I]'DLE-HAND, the hand which holds the bridle in riding--the left hand;
BR[=I]'DLE-PATH, a path or way for horsemen; BR[=I]'DLER, one who governs
or restrains as by a bridle; BRI'DLE-REIN, the strap of a bridle.--TO
BRIDLE UP (at something), to take something amiss. [A.S. _brídel_; Old High
Ger. _brittel_.]

BRIDOON, brid'[=oo]n, _n._ the light snaffle usual in a military bridle, in
addition to the ordinary bit, controlled by a separate rein. [Fr. _bridon_,
_bride_, a bridle.]

BRIEF, br[=e]f, _n._ a short account of a client's case for the instruction
of counsel: a writ: a short statement of any kind.--_adj._ short:
concise.--_adj._ BRIEF'LESS.--_adv._ BRIEF'LY.--_n._ BRIEF'NESS.--IN BRIEF,
in few words.--KING'S BRIEFS, royal mandates ordering collections to be
made in chapels for building churches, &c.; PAPAL BRIEF, such documents as
are issued without some of the solemnities proper to bulls.--THE BRIEF AND
THE LONG (_Shak._), the short and the long.--TO BE BRIEF, to speak in a few
words; TO HOLD A BRIEF, to be retained as counsel in a case; TO TAKE A
BRIEF, to undertake a case. [Fr. _bref_--L. _brevis_, short.]

BRIER, br[=i]'er, _n._ a prickly shrub: a common name for the wild rose:
(_Scot._) the thorn of the brier--also BR[=I]'AR.--_adjs._ BR[=I]'ERY,
BR[=I]'ERED, having briers. [A.S. _brér_.]

BRIER, BRIAR, br[=i]'[.e]r, _n._ the white heath, a shrub grown in France,
from the root of which tobacco-pipes are made: a pipe of this wood. [Fr.
_bruyère_, heath.]

[Illustration]

BRIG, brig, _n._ a two-masted, square-rigged vessel. [Shortened from
Brigantine.]

BRIGADE, brig-[=a]d', _n._ a body of troops consisting of two or more
regiments of infantry or cavalry, and commanded by a general officer, two
or more of which form a division: a band of people more or less
organised.--_v.t._ to form into brigades.--_ns._ BRIGADE'-M[=A]'JOR, a
staff-officer attached to a brigade; BRIGADIER', BRIGADIER'-GEN'ERAL, a
general officer of the lowest grade, who has command of a brigade. [Fr.
_brigade_--It. _brigata_--Low L. _briga_, strife.]

BRIGAND, brig'and, _n._ a robber or freebooter.--_ns._ BRIG'ANDAGE,
freebooting: plundering; BRIG'ANDINE, BRIG'ANTINE, a coat-of-mail, composed
of linen or leather, with steel rings or plates sewed upon it. [Fr.--It.
_brigante_--_briga_, strife.]

BRIGANTINE, brig'an-t[=i]n, _n._ a two-masted vessel, with the mainmast of
a schooner and the foremast of a brig. [Fr. _brigantin_--It. _brigantine_,
a pirate ship.]

BRIGHT, br[=i]t, _adj._ shining: full of light: clear: beautiful: cheerful:
clever: illustrious.--_adv._ (_Shak._) brightly: clearly.--_v.t._
BRIGHT'EN, to make bright or brighter.--_v.i._ to grow bright or brighter:
to clear up.--_adv._ BRIGHT'LY.--_n._ BRIGHT'NESS.--_adj._ BRIGHT'SOME,
bright: brilliant. [A.S. _beorht_; cog. with Goth. _bairhts_, clear, L.
_flagr_-_[=a]re_, to flame.]

BRIGHT'S-DISEASE, br[=i]ts'-diz-[=e]z', _n._ a generic name for a group of
diseases of the kidneys, which may be defined as comprising cases where
structural changes in the kidneys, usually inflammatory, but without
suppuration, lead to the presence of albumen in the urine. [From Dr Richard
_Bright_ (1789-1858).]

BRIGUE, brig, _v.i._ to intrigue.--_n._ strife, intrigue.--_n._ BRIGU'ING,
canvassing. [Fr. _brigue_; derivation uncertain.]

BRILL, bril, _n._ a fish of the same kind as the turbot, spotted with
white. [Ety. unknown.]

[Illustration]

BRILLIANT, bril'yant, _adj._ sparkling: glittering: splendid.--_n._ a
diamond of the finest cut (as opposed to _rose-cut_ or other
patterns).--_ns._ BRILL'IANCY, BRILL'IANCE.--_adv._ BRILL'IANTLY.--_n._
BRILL'IANTNESS.[Fr. _brillant_, pr.p. of _briller_, to shine, which, like
Ger. _brille_, an eyeglass, is from Low L. _beryllus_, a beryl.]

BRIM, brim, _n._ the margin or brink of a river or lake: the upper edge of
a vessel: the rim of a hat.--_v.t._ to fill to the brim.--_v.i._ to be full
to the brim:--_pr.p._ brim'ming; _pa.p._ brimmed.--_adj._ BRIM'FUL, full to
the brim.--_n._ BRIM'FULNESS (_Shak._), fullness to the top.--_adjs._
BRIM'LESS, without a brim; BRIMMED, brimful: having a brim--used in
composition.--_n._ BRIM'MER, a bowl full to the brim or top.--_adj._
BRIM'MING. [M. E. _brymme_--_bremman_, to roar.]

BRIMSTONE, brim'st[=o]n, _n._ sulphur: (_fig._) a virago.--FIRE AND
BRIMSTONE! an ejaculation. [Lit. burning stone; from A.S. _brýne_, a
burning--_byrnan_, to burn, and STONE; cf. Ger. _bernstein_.]

BRINDED, brin'ded, BRINDLED, brin'dld, _adj._ marked with spots or
streaks.--_n._ BRIN'DLE, state of being brindled. [See BRAND.]

BRINE, br[=i]n, _n._ salt water: the sea.--_ns._ BRINE'-PIT, a pit or pan
in which brine is evaporated, so as to form salt: a salt spring;
BRINE'-SHRIMP, a small crustacean.--_adjs._ BRIN'ISH, like brine: somewhat
salt; BRIN'Y, pertaining to brine or to the sea: salt.--THE BRINY
(_slang_), the sea. [A.S. _brýne_, a burning; applied to salt liquor, from
its burning, biting quality.]

BRING, bring, _v.t._ to fetch: to carry: to procure: to occasion: to draw
or lead:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ brought (brawt).--BRING ABOUT, to bring to
pass, effect; BRING DOWN, to humble; BRING FORTH, to give birth to,
produce; BRING HOME, to prove, to impress; BRING IN, to introduce; BRING
OFF, to bring away, as by a boat from a ship, to rescue; BRING ON, to cause
to advance; BRING OUT, to express: to produce before the public, as a book,
a play, a subscription: to introduce a young woman formally into so-called
society; BRING OVER, to convert; BRING ROUND, to restore from illness;
BRING TO, to check the course of, as a ship, by trimming the sails so as to
counteract each other; BRING UNDER, to subdue; BRING UP, to rear or
educate. [A.S. _bringan_, to carry, to bring; allied perh. to BEAR.]

BRINJARRY, brin-zhar'i, _n._ a travelling dealer in grain and salt in
Southern India. [Hind. _b[=a]nj[=a]ra_.]

BRINK, bringk, _n._ the edge or border of a steep place or of a river:
(_fig._) the very verge of time, at the very point of something--e.g. TO BE
ON THE BRINK OF DEATH. [Dan. _brink_, declivity; Ice. _bringa_, a hillock.]

BRIO, br[=i]'o, _n._ liveliness, vivacity. [It. _brio_.]

BRIOCHE, bri-osh', _n._ a sponge-cake. [Fr.]

BRIONY. Same as BRYONY.

BRIQUETTE, bri-ket', _n._ a brick-shaped block of coal formed from
coal-dust. [Fr. _briquette_, dim. of _brique_, a BRICK.]

BRISK, brisk, _adj._ full of life and spirit: active: sharp: effervescing,
as liquors.--_v.t._ to enliven, freshen.--_v.i._ to cheer up.--_adjs._
BRISK'ISH, BRISK'Y, (_Shak._).--_adv._ BRISK'LY.--_n._ BRISK'NESS. [Dr
Murray notes that the word is first found in the end of the 16th century;
prob. W. _brysg_, swift of foot; cf. Gael. _brisg_, Ir. _briosg_.]

BRISKET, brisk'et, _n._ the breast of an animal: the part of the breast
next to the ribs. [Fr. _brechet_, _brichet_.]

BRISTLE, bris'l, _n._ a short, stiff hair, as of swine.--_v.i._ to stand
erect, as bristles.--_v.t._ to cover, as with bristles: to make
bristly:--_pr.p._ bris'tling; _pa.p._ brist'led.--_adj._ BRISTLED
(bris'ld), furnished with bristles.--_n._ BRIST'LINESS.--_adj._ BRIST'LY,
set with bristles: rough.--TO SET UP ONE'S BRISTLES, to show temper. [A.S.
_byrst_; Scot. _birse_; cog. with Ger. _borste_, Ice. _burst_.]

BRISTOL-BOARD, bris'tul-b[=o]rd, _n._ a smooth pasteboard.--_ns._
BRIS'TOL-BRICK, an earthy material for scouring cutlery, like bath-brick;
BRIS'TOL-D[=I]'AMOND, a kind of crystal found near Bristol. [From the town
of _Bristol_, in England.]

BRISURE, bri-zh[=u]r', _n._ (_fort._) any part of a rampart or parapet
which breaks off at an angle from the general direction: (_her._) a
variation of a coat-of-arms, showing the relation of a younger to the main
line. [Fr.--_briser_, to break.]

BRITANNIA-METAL, brit-an'i-a-met'l, _n._ a metallic alloy largely used in
the manufacture of spoons, &c.

BRITANNIC, brit-an'ik, _adj._ pertaining to _Britannia_ or Great Britain:
British.--_adj._ BRITISH, in ethnography, Old Celtic as opposed to
Anglo-Saxon: pertaining to Great Britain or its people--_ns._ BRIT'ISHER, a
British subject (Amer.); BRIT'ON, a native of Britain.

BRITTLE, brit'l, _adj._ apt to break: easily broken: frail.--_ns._
BRITT'LENESS; BRITT'LE-STARS, or _Sand-stars_, one of the classes of
Echinodermata, including forms not far removed from starfishes. [A.S.
_bréotan_, to break.]

BRITZKA, BRITZSKA, brits'ka, _n._ an open four-wheeled carriage with
shutters to close at pleasure, and only one seat.--Also BRITSCHKA, BRITSKA.
[Polish _bryczka_, dim. of _bryka_, a wagon.]

BROACH, br[=o]ch, _n._ a tapering, pointed instrument, used chiefly for
boring: a spit: a church spire.--_v.t._ to pierce as a cask, to tap: to
open up or begin: to utter.--_n._ BROACH'ER, a broach or spit: one who
broaches or utters.--TO BROACH THE ADMIRAL, to steal some liquor from a
cask while being carried by rail or otherwise, or when in store; TO BROACH
TO, to turn a ship to windward. [Fr. _brocher_, to pierce, _broche_, an
iron pin--L. _brocchus_, a projecting tooth.]

BROAD, brawd, _adj._ wide: large, free or open: outspoken: coarse,
indelicate: of pronunciation, e.g. a broad accent.--_advs._ BROAD,
BROAD'LY.--_ns._ BROAD'-AR'ROW, a mark, thus ([Broad arrow]), stamped on
materials belonging to Government; BROAD'-BRIM, a hat with a broad brim,
such as those worn by Quakers: (_coll._) a Quaker.--_adj._ BROAD'CAST,
scattered or sown abroad by the hand: dispersed widely.--_adv._ by throwing
at large from the hand, only in phrases, as, 'to scatter broadcast,'
&c.--_v.t._ to scatter freely.--_n._ BROAD'CLOTH, a fine kind of woollen
fulled cloth, used for men's garments.--_v.t._ BROAD'EN, to make broad or
broader.--_v.i._ to grow broad or extend in breadth.--_adj._ BROAD'-EYED
(_Shak._), having a wide or extended survey.--_ns._ BROAD'-GAUGE (see
GAUGE); BROAD'NESS.--_n.pl._ BROADS, lake-like expansions of rivers.--_ns._
BROAD'SIDE, the side of a ship: all the guns on one side of a ship of war,
or their simultaneous discharge: a sheet of paper printed on one side,
otherwise named BROAD'SHEET; BROAD'SWORD, a cutting sword with a broad
blade: a man armed with such a sword.--BROAD CHURCH, a party within the
Church of England which advocates a broad and liberal interpretation of
dogmatic definitions and creed subscription--the name was first used in
1833 by W. J. Conybeare. [A.S. _brád_, Goth. _braids_.]

BROBDINGNAGIAN, brob-ding-n[=a]'ji-an, _n._ an inhabitant of the fabulous
region of _Brobdingnag_ in _Gulliver's Travels_, the people of which were
of great stature--hence a gigantic person.--_adj._ gigantic.--_adj._
BROBDINGNAG', immense.

BROCADE, brok-[=a]d', _n._ a silk stuff on which figures are
wrought.--_adj._ BROCAD'ED, woven or worked in the manner of brocade:
dressed in brocade. [It. _broccato_, Fr. _brocart_, from It. _broccare_,
Fr. _brocher_, to prick, stitch; from root of BROACH.]

BROCAGE, br[=o]k'[=a]j, _n._ Obsolete spelling of BROKAGE (q.v. under
BROKER).

BROCARD, brok'ärd, _n._ an elementary law or principle: a canon: (_Fr._) a
gibe. [Fr. _brocard_, Low L. _brocarda_, from _Brocard_ or Burchard, Bishop
of Worms, who published a book of ecclesiastical rules.]

BROCCOLI, brok'o-li, _n._ a cultivated kind of cabbage resembling
cauliflower, of which it is originally a hardy variety. [It.; _pl._ of
_broccolo_, a sprout, dim. of _brocco_, a skewer, a shoot.]

BROCH, broh, _n._ the local name applied in the north of Scotland to the
ancient dry-built circular castles, known also to the Gaelic-speaking
people as _duns_, and to antiquaries as _Pictish towers_.--Also BROGH and
BROUGH. [Old Norse _borg_; A.S. _burh_.]

BROCH, br[=o]ch, obsolete spelling of BROACH.

BROCHURE, bro-sh[=oo]r', _n._ a pamphlet. [Lit. a small book stitched,
Fr.--_brocher_, to stitch--_broche_, a needle. See BROACH.]

BROCK, brok, _n._ a badger--hence, from the smell, a dirty, stinking
fellow.--_adj._ BROCKED (_Scot._), variegated, having a mixture of black
and white. [From the Celt., as in Gael. _broc_, a badger, which is from
Gael. _breac_, speckled.]

BRODE, br[=o]d, _adv._ (_Spens._). Same as ABROAD.

BRODEKIN, BRODKIN, br[=o]d'kin, _n._ a buskin. [Fr. _brodequin_.]

BROG, brog, _n._ a pointed steel instrument used for piercing holes:
(_Scot._) an awl.--_v.t._ to prick. [Ety. dub.; the Gael. _brog_; an awl,
is prob. borrowed.]

BROGUE, br[=o]g, _n._ a stout coarse shoe: a dialect or manner of
pronunciation, esp. the Irish. [Ir. and Gael. _brog_, a shoe.]

BROIDER, broid'[.e]r, BROIDERY, broid'[.e]r-i. Same as EMBROIDER,
EMBROIDERY.--BROIDERED (_B._) = _Embroidered_.

BROIL, broil, _n._ a noisy quarrel: a confused disturbance--(_Scot._)
BRUL'YIE, BRUL'ZIE.--_n._ BROIL'ER, one who stirs up broils. [Fr.
_brouiller_, to trouble.]

BROIL, broil, _v.t._ to cook over hot coals: to grill.--_v.i._ to be
greatly heated. [Ety. dub.]

BROKE, br[=o]k, _pa.t._ and old _pa.p._ of BREAK.--_p.adj._ BROK'EN, rent
asunder: infirm: humbled or crushed: dispersed, routed: altered in
direction: shattered in estate or position: incomplete, fragmentary:
uncertain.--_adjs._ BROK'EN-BACKED, having the back broken, applied to a
ship so loosened in her frame as to droop at both ends; BROK'EN-DOWN,
decayed, ruined in character or strength; BROK'EN-HEART'ED, crushed with
grief: greatly depressed in spirit.--_adv._ BROK'ENLY.--_ns._ BROK'EN-MAN,
one under outlawry, esp. in the Highlands and Border country; BROK'EN-MEAT,
the leavings of a banquet; BROK'ENNESS.--_adj._ BROK'EN-WIND'ED, having
short breath or disordered respiration, as a horse.

BROKER, br[=o]k'[.e]r, _n._ one employed to buy and sell for others: a
second-hand dealer: a pander: a commissioner.--_v.i._ BROKE, to bargain,
negotiate: (_Shak._) to act as a pander or go-between:--_pr.p._
br[=o]k'ing; _pa.p._ br[=o]ked.--_ns._ BROK'ERAGE, BROK'AGE, the business
of a broker: the commission charged by a broker: a commission charged for
transacting business for others; BROK'ERY, the business of a
broker.--_p.adj._ BROK'ING, doing business as a broker: practised by
brokers. [M. E. _brocour_--A.S. _brucan_; Ger. _brauchen_, to use, to
profit.]

BROMATE. See BROMINE.

BROME-GRASS, br[=o]m'-gras, _n._ a kind of grass bearing a strong
resemblance to oats. [Gr. _br[=o]mos_, and _bromos_, grass.]

BROMINE, br[=o]m'in, _n._ one of the elements, closely allied to chlorine,
so called from its disagreeable smell.--_adj._ BROM'IC, pertaining to
bromine.--_ns._ BROM'ATE, a combination of bromic acid with a salifiable
base; BROM'IDE, a combination of bromine with a base.--BROMIC ACID, an acid
composed of bromine and oxygen. [Gr. _br[=o]mos_, a disagreeable odour.]

BRONCHIÆ, brongk'i-[=e], _n.pl._ a name given to the ramifications of the
windpipe which carry air into the lungs.--_adjs._ BRONCH'IC,
BRONCH'IAL.--_n._ BRONCH[=I]'TIS, inflammation of the bronchiæ. [L.--Gr.
_bronchia_, the bronchial tubes.]

BRONCHO, BRONCO, brong'ko, _n._ (_U.S._) a half-tamed horse. [Sp. _bronco_,
rough, sturdy.]

BROND. Same as BRAND.

BRONZE, bronz, _n._ an alloy of copper and tin used in various ways since
the most ancient times: anything cast in bronze: the colour of bronze:
(_fig._) impudence.--_adj._ made of bronze: coloured like bronze.--_v.t._
to give the appearance of bronze to: (_fig._) to harden.--_adj._ BRONZED,
coated with bronze: hardened.--_ns._ BRONZE'-STEEL, or _Steel-bronze_, a
specially hardened bronze; BRONZE'-WING, BRONZE'-PI'GEON, a species of
Australian pigeon having wings marked with a lustrous bronze
colour.--_v.t._ BRONZ'IFY, to make into bronze.--_ns._ BRONZ'ING, the
process of giving the appearance of bronze; BRONZ'ITE, a lustrous kind of
diallage.--_adj._ BRONZ'Y, having the appearance of bronze.--BRONZE AGE or
PERIOD, a term in prehistoric archæology denoting the condition or stage of
culture of a people using bronze as the material for cutting implements and
weapons--as a stage of culture coming between the use of stone and the use
of iron for those purposes--not an absolute division of time, but a
relative condition of culture. [Fr.--It. _bronzo_--L. _Brundusium_, the
modern _Brindisi_.]

BROO, br[=oo] (mod. Scot.--vowel sounded like Ger. _ü_), _n._ (_Scot._)
broth. [Ety. dub.: prob. O. Fr. _bro_, _breu_, broth; prob conn. with
BREE.]

BROOCH, br[=o]ch, _n._ an ornamental pin or instrument for fastening any
article of dress, consisting for the most part either of a ring or disc, or
of a semicircle, there being a pin in either case passing across it,
fastened at one end with a joint or loop, and at the other with a
hook.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to adorn as with a brooch. [Fr. _broche_, a spit.
See BROACH.]

BROOD, br[=oo]d, _v.t._ to sit upon or cover in order to breed or hatch: to
hatch: to cover, as with wings: to mature or foster with care: to meditate
moodily upon.--_v.i._ to sit as a hen on eggs: to hover over: to think
anxiously for some time: to meditate silently (with _on_, _over_): to be
bred.--_n._ something bred: offspring, children, or family: a race, kind:
parentage: the number hatched at once.--_adj._ for breeding, as in
_brood_-mare, &c.--_adv._ BROOD'INGLY.--_adj._ BROOD'Y, inclined to sit or
incubate. [A.S. _bród_; Dut. _broed_; what is hatched.]

BROOK, br[=oo]k, _n._ a small stream.--_ns._ BROOK'LET, a little brook;
BROOK'LIME, a species of speedwell found in ditches. [A.S. _bróc_, water
breaking forth; Dut. _broek_, Ger. _bruch_.]

BROOK, br[=oo]k, _v.t._ to enjoy: to bear or endure. [A.S. _búrcan_, to
use, enjoy; Ger. _brauchen_, L. _frui_, _fructus_.]

BROOL, br[=oo]l, _n._ a deep murmur. [Ger. _brüll_, a roar.]

BROOM, br[=oo]m, _n._ a name given to a number of species of shrubs of the
closely allied genera Cytisus, Genista, and Spartium: a besom made of its
twigs.--_v.t._ to sweep with a broom.--_ns._ BROOM'-CORN, a species of
plant resembling maize, cultivated for its seed and its spikes, of which
brooms are made; BROOM'-RAPE, a parasitic plant found adhering to the root
of broom, clover, &c.; BROOM'STAFF, BROOM'STICK, the staff or handle of a
broom.--_adj._ BROOM'Y, abounding in or consisting of broom.--TO MARRY OVER
THE BROOMSTICK, or TO JUMP THE BESOM, to go through an irregular form of
marriage, in which both jump over a broomstick. [A.S. _bróm_; Ger. _bram_.]

BROOSE, brüz, _n._ (_Scot._) a race at weddings in Scotland. [Derivation
unknown.]

BROSE, br[=o]z, _n._ a simple and nutritious food, made by pouring boiling
water or milk on oatmeal, seasoned with salt and butter.--ATHOLE BROSE, a
mixture of whisky and honey. [Scot.; O. Fr. _broez_.]

BROTH, broth, _n._ an infusion or decoction of vegetable and animal
substances in water.--A BROTH OF A BOY (_Irish_), a first-rate fellow.
[A.S. _broth_--_bréowan_, to brew. See BREW.]

BROTHEL, broth'el, _n._ a house of ill-fame. [M. E. _brothel_--A. S.
_broð-en_, ruined, _bréðen_, to go to ruin.]

BROTHER, bruth'[.e]r, _n._ a male born of the same parents: any one closely
united with or resembling another; associated in common interests,
occupation, &c.: a fellow-member of a religious order, a fellow-member of a
guild, &c.: a fellow-creature, fellow-citizen, a co-religionist: (_B._) a
kinsman: _pl._ BROTH'ERS and BRETH'REN, the latter esp. used in the sense
of fellow-membership of guilds, religious communities, &c., and is a name
given to certain sections of the Church of Christ, as Christian Brethren,
Moravian Brethren, Plymouth Brethren, &c.--_ns._ BROTH'ER-GER'MAN, a
brother having the same father and mother, in contradistinction to a
_half-brother_, by one parent only; BROTH'ERHOOD, the state of being a
brother: an association of men for any purpose; BROTH'ER-IN-LAW, the
brother of a husband or wife: a sister's husband.--_adjs._ BROTH'ER-LIKE,
BROTH'ERLY, like a brother: kind: affectionate.--_n._ BROTH'ERLINESS, state
of being brotherly: kindness. [A.S. _broðor_; cog. with Ger. _bruder_,
Gael. _brathair_, Fr. _frère_, L. _frater_, Sans. _bhrátar_.]

BROUGHAM, br[=oo]'am, or br[=oo]m, _n._ a one-horse close carriage, either
two or four wheeled, named after Lord _Brougham_ (1778-1868).

BROUGHT, brawt, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of BRING.

BROW, brow, _n._ the eyebrow: the ridge over the eyes: the forehead: the
edge of a hill: a gallery in a coalmine running across the face of the
coal: (_fig._) aspect, appearance.--_v.t._ BROW'BEAT, to bear down with
stern looks or speech: to bully.--_adjs._ BROW'-BOUND, having the brow
bound as with a crown: crowned; BROW'LESS, without shame. [A.S. _brú_; Ice.
_brün_.]

BROWN, brown, _adj._ of a dark or dusky colour, inclining to red or yellow:
dark-complexioned: sunburnt.--_n._ a dark-reddish colour: (_slang_) a
copper.--_v.t._ to make brown, or give a brown colour to: to roast
brown.--_ns._ BROWN'-BESS, the old British flint-lock musket--from the
brown walnut stock; BROWN'-BILL, a foot-soldier's or watchman's halbert,
painted brown; BROWN'-BREAD, bread of a brown colour, made of unbolted
flour; BROWN'-COAL, commonly called _Lignite_, an imperfect kind of coal
which exhibits more of its woody structure than ordinary coal;
BROWN'-GEORGE, a hard biscuit: a brown earthen vessel; BROWN'ING, the
process of imparting a brown colour to iron articles: a preparation for
giving a brown colour to gravy, &c., or for dressing brown leather.--_adj._
BROWN'ISH.--_ns._ BROWN'NESS; BROWN'-P[=A]'PER, coarse and strong paper
used chiefly for wrapping; BROWN'-SPAR, a name given to certain varieties
of dolomite or magnesian limestone, distinguished by their brownish colour;
BROWN'-STOUT, a kind of porter; BROWN'-STUD'Y, gloomy reverie:
absent-mindedness.--_adj._ BROWN'Y (_Shak._), of a brown colour.--TO DO
BROWN (_slang_), to do thoroughly, to deceive or take in completely. [A.S.
_brún_; Dut. _bruin_, Ger. _braun_.]

BROWNIE, brown'i, _n._ a kind of domestic spirit in the folklore of
Scotland, represented as a good-humoured, drudging goblin, who attached
himself to farmhouses, and occupied himself overnight in churning,
thrashing corn, and the like. [_Brown._]

BROWNIST, brown'ist, _n._ one holding the Church principles of Robert
_Browne_ (1550-1633), which may be said to have given birth to the
Independents or Congregationalists of England.

BROWSE, browz, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to feed on the shoots or leaves of
plants.--_ns._ BROWSE, BROWS'ING, the shoots and leaves of plants: fodder:
the action of the verb browse. [O. Fr. _brouster_ (Fr.
_brouter_)--_broust_, a sprout.]

BROWST, browst, _n._ (_Scot._) a brewing. [BREW.]

BRUCKLE, bruk'l, _adj._ (_Scot._) liable to break, brittle. [A.S.
_brucol_--_brekan_, to BREAK.]

BRUIN, br[=oo]'in, _n._ a bear, so called from the name of the bear in the
famous beast-epic _Reynard the Fox_, just as _reynard_ and _chanticleer_
have also passed from proper names into common names, often written without
capitals. [_Bruin_ = _brown_.]

BRUISE, br[=oo]z, _v.t._ to crush by beating or pounding: to oppress: to
box or fight with the fists: to ride recklessly in hunting, careless alike
of horse and crops: to reduce to small fragments.--_n._ a wound made by
anything heavy and blunt.--_p.adj._ BRUISED, hurt by a heavy blow, with
skin crushed and discoloured.--_n._ BRUIS'ER, one that bruises: a
boxer.--_p.adj._ BRUIS'ING, boxing. [A.S. _brýsan_, to crush, with which,
says Dr Murray, afterwards coalesced Fr. _brisie-r_; _bruisier_, _bruser_,
to break.]

BRUIT, br[=oo]t, _n._ noise: something noised abroad: a rumour or
report.--_v.t._ to noise abroad: to report: to celebrate. [Fr. _bruit_--Fr.
_bruire_; cf. Low L. _brug[=i]tus_; prob. imit.]

BRULZIE, BRUILZIE, brül'yi, _n._ Scotch and northern form of BROIL.

BRUMAIRE, br[=oo]m[=a]r', _n._ the second month in the French revolutionary
calendar, extending from Oct. 22 to Nov. 20. [Fr. _brume_, fog--L. _bruma_,
winter.]

BRUME, br[=oo]m, _n._ fog.--_adjs._ BRUM'AL, relating to winter; BRUM'OUS,
foggy, wintry. [L. _bruma_, winter, contr. from _brevima_, the shortest
day.]

BRUMMAGEM, brum'a-jem, _adj._ showy but worthless, sham, counterfeit. [From
a popular pronunciation of _Birmingham_.]

BRUNETTE, br[=oo]n-et', _n._ a girl with a brown or dark complexion. [Fr.
dim. of _brun_, brown.]

BRUNONIAN, br[=oo]-no'ni-an, _adj._ relating to the system of medicine
founded by Dr John _Brown_ of Edinburgh (1736-88)--all diseases _sthenic_,
those depending on an excess of excitement, or _asthenic_, those resulting
from a deficiency of it.

BRUNT, brunt, _n._ the shock of an onset or contest: the force of a blow:
the chief stress or crisis of anything.--_v.t._ to bear the brunt of. [Ice.
_bruna_, to advance like fire, is usually given; Dr Murray suggests that it
may be an onomatopoeia of Eng. itself (cf. DUNT), or connected with
_burnt_--Scot. _brunt_.]

BRUSH, brush, _n._ an instrument for removing dust, usually made of
bristles, twigs, feathers, or stiff grass stems: a kind of hair-pencil used
by painters: a painter, one who uses the brush: brushwood: a skirmish or
encounter: the tail of a fox: (_elect._) a brush-like discharge of sparks:
one of the bundles of copper wires or flexible strips in contact with the
commutator of the armature on opposite sides, and which carry off the
positive and negative currents of electricity generated.--_v.t._ to remove
dust, &c., from by sweeping: to touch lightly in passing: remove (with
_off_): to thrash.--_v.i._ to move over lightly: to make off with a
rush.--_n._ BRUSH'ING, the act of rubbing or sweeping.--_adj._ in a lively
manner: brisk.--_ns._ BRUSH'-WHEEL, a wheel used in light machinery to turn
another by having the rubbing surface covered with stiff hairs or bristles;
BRUSH'WOOD, rough close bushes: a thicket.--_adj._ BRUSH'Y, rough,
rugged.--TO BRUSH UP, to brighten, revive. [O. Fr. _brosse_, a brush,
brushwood--Low L. _bruscia_; Diez connects the Fr. with Old High Ger.
_burst_, _bursta_, bristle.]

BRUSQUE, br[=oo]sk, _adj._ blunt, abrupt in manner, rude.--_adv._
BRUSQUE'LY.--_ns._ BRUSQUE'NESS; BRUSQUE'RIE. [Fr. _brusque_; rude. See
BRISK.]

BRUSSELS, brus'elz, _n._ contracted from BRUSSELS-CARPET, a kind of carpet
in which the worsted threads are arranged in the warp, and are interwoven
into a network of linen. Still, the bulk of the carpet consists of
wool.--_n.pl._ BRUSS'ELS-SPROUTS, a variety of the common cabbage with
sprouts like miniature cabbages. [Named from _Brussels_ in Belgium.]

BRUST, brust, _pa.p._ (_Spens._). Same as BURST.

BRUTE, br[=oo]t, _adj._ belonging to the lower animals: irrational: stupid:
rude.--_n._ one of the lower animals.--_adj._ BRUT'AL, like a brute:
unfeeling: inhuman.--_v.t._ BRUT'ALISE, to make like a brute, to
degrade.--_v.i._ to live like a brute.--_n._ BRUTAL'ITY.--_adv._
BRUT'ALLY.--_n._ BRUTE'NESS, brute-like state: brutality: (_Spens._)
stupidity.--_v.t._ BRUT'IFY, to make brutal, stupid, or
uncivilised:--_pr.p._ brutify'ing; _pa.p._ brutif[=i]ed'.--_adj._ BRUT'ISH,
brutal: (_B._) unwise.--_adv._ BRUT'ISHLY.--_n._ BRUT'ISHNESS.--THE BRUTE
CREATION, the lower animals. [Fr. _brut_--L. _brutus_, dull, irrational.]

BRUTUS, br[=oo]'tus, _n._ a kind of wig: a way of wearing the hair brushed
back from the forehead, popular at the time of the French Revolution, when
it was an affectation to admire the old Romans, as _Brutus_.

BRYOLOGY, br[=i]-ol'o-ji, _n._ the study of mosses. [Gr. _bryon_, moss, and
_logia_--_legein_, to speak.]

BRYONY, br[=i]'o-ni, _n._ a wild climbing plant, common in English
hedgerows.--BLACK BRYONY, a climbing plant similar to bryony in habit and
disposition, but which may be readily distinguished by its simple, entire,
heart-shaped leaves, which are smooth and somewhat glossy. [L.--Gr.
_bry[=o]nia_.]

BRYOZOA, br[=i]-[=o]-z[=o]'a, _n.pl._ an old name for the Polyzoa, from
their resemblance to mosses.

BRYTHONIC, br[=i]th-on'ik, _adj._ a name introduced by Prof. Rhys for the
second of the two great divisions of Celtic ethnology. The _Goidelic_ or
_Gadhelic_ group embraces Irish, Manx, and Gaelic; the _Brythonic_ group,
Welsh, Breton, and Cornish. [_Brython_, one of the Welsh words for the
Welsh and so-called Ancient Britons.]

BUB, bub, _n._ (_slang_) strong drink.

BUBALIS, b[=u]'bal-is, _n._ a genus in the Antelope division of
hollow-horned, even-toed Ruminants, not to be confused with the genus
_Bubalus_, the Buffalo. [Gr.]

BUBBLE, bub'l, _n._ a bladder of water blown out with air: anything empty:
a cheating scheme.--_adj._ unsubstantial, deceptive.--_v.i._ to rise in
bubbles.--_v.t._ to cheat with bubble schemes:--_pr.p._ bubb'ling; _pa.p._
bubb'led.--_adj._ BUBB'LY.--_n._ BUBB'LY-JOCK, a Scotch name for a
turkey-cock.--BUBBLE AND SQUEAK, meat and cabbage fried together.--TO
BUBBLE OVER, as of a pot boiling, with anger, mirth, &c. [Cf. Sw. _bubbla_,
Dut. _bobbel_.]

BUBO, b[=u]'bo, _n._ an inflammatory swelling of the glands in the groin or
armpit.--_adj._ BUBON'IC, accompanied by buboes.--_n._ B[=U]B'UKLE, a
ridiculous word of Fluellen's for a red pimple, corrupted from _bubo_ and
_carbuncle_. [L.--Gr. _boub[=o]n_, the groin.]

BUCCAL, buk'al, _adj._ pertaining to the cheek. [L.]

BUCCANEER, BUCCANIER, buk-an-[=e]r', _n._ one of the piratical adventurers
in the West Indies during the 17th century, who plundered the Spaniards
chiefly.--_v.i._ to act as a buccaneer.--_n._ BUCCANEER'ING.--_adj._
BUCCANEER'ISH. [Fr. _boucaner_, to smoke meat--Carib. _boucan_, a wooden
gridiron. The French settlers in the W.I. cooked their meat on a _boucan_
in native fashion, and were hence called _boucaniers_.]

BUCCINATOR, buk-sin-[=a]'tor, _n._ the name of a flat muscle forming the
wall of the cheek, assisting in mastication and in the blowing of
wind-instruments.--_adj._ BUCCINAT'ORY. [L.;--_buccinare_.]

BUCENTAUR, b[=oo]-sen'tawr, _n._ a mythical monster half man and half bull:
the state barge of Venice used annually on Ascension Day in the ancient
ceremony of the marriage of the state with the Adriatic. [It. _bucentoro_,
usually explained as from Gr. _bous_, an ox, _kentauros_, a centaur.]

BUCEPHALUS, b[=u]-sef'a-lus, _n._ the famous war-horse of Alexander the
Great: a familiar name for a riding-horse. [Gr.; _bous_, ox, _kephal[=e]_,
head.]

BUCK, buk, _n._ the male of the deer, goat, hare, and rabbit--often used
specifically of the male of the fallow-deer: a dashing young
fellow.--_v.i._ (of a horse or mule--a BUCK'JUMPER) to attempt to throw by
a series of rapid jumps into the air, coming down with the back arched, the
head down, and the forelegs stiff: (_U.S._) to make obstinate resistance to
any improvements.--_ns._ BUCK'EEN, a poor Irish gentleman, without means to
support his gentility; BUCK'-EYE, the American horse-chestnut; BUCK'HORN,
the material of a buck's horn; BUCK'-HOUND, a small kind of staghound used
for hunting bucks; BUCK'-SHOT, a large kind of shot, used in shooting deer;
BUCK'SKIN, a soft leather made of deerskin or sheepskin: a strong twilled
woollen cloth, cropped of nap and carefully finished.--_adj._ made of the
skin of a buck.--_n.pl._ BUCK'SKINS, breeches made usually of the cloth,
not of the leather.--_ns._ BUCK'THORN, a genus of shrubs, the berry of
which supplies the sap-green used by painters; BUCK'-TOOTH, a projecting
tooth. [A.S. _buc_, _bucca_; Dut. _bok_, Ger. _bock_, a he-goat.]

BUCK, buk, _v.t._ to soak or steep in lye, a process in bleaching.--_n._
lye in which clothes are bleached.--_n._ BUCK'-BAS'KET, a basket in which
clothes are carried to be bucked. [Ety. obscure; M. E. _bouken_; cog. words
are Ger. _bäuchen_, _beuchen_.]

BUCKBEAN, buk'b[=e]n, _n._ the marsh-trefoil, a plant common in bogs in
Britain. [Corr. of _Bogbean_.]

BUCKET, buk'et, _n._ a vessel for drawing or holding water, &c.; one of the
compartments on the circumference of a water-wheel, or one of the scoops of
a dredging-machine: the leather socket for holding the whip in driving, or
for the carbine or lance when mounted: a name given to the pitcher in some
orchids.--_ns._ BUCK'ETFUL, as much as a bucket will hold; BUCK'ETING
(_U.S._), jerky rowing; BUCK'ET-SHOP, slang term for the offices of
'outside brokers'--mere agents for bets on the rise or fall of prices of
stock, &c.; BUCK'ET-WHEEL, a contrivance for raising water by means of
buckets attached to the circumference of a wheel.--GIVE THE BUCKET, to
dismiss; KICK THE BUCKET (_slang_), to die. [Prob. conn. with A.S. _búc_, a
pitcher; or O. Fr. _buket_, a pail. Not Gael. _bucaid_, a bucket.]

BUCKIE, buk'i, _n._ (_Scot._) a shellfish such as the whelk: a refractory
person. [Scot., prob. related somehow to L. _buccinum_, a shellfish.]

BUCKLE, buk'l, _n._ a metal instrument consisting of a rim and tongue, used
for fastening straps or bands in dress, harness, &c.--_v.t._ to fasten with
a buckle: to prepare for action: to engage in close fight.--_v.i._ to bend
or bulge out: to engage with zeal in a task.--_n._ BUCK'LER, a small shield
used for parrying. [Fr. _boucle_, the boss of a shield, a ring--Low L.
_buccula_, dim. of _bucca_, a cheek.]

BUCKRA, buk'ra, _n._ a word used by West Indian and American negroes for a
white man--said in a dialect of the Calabar coast to mean 'demon.'

BUCKRAM, buk'ram, _n._ a coarse open-woven fabric of cotton or linen made
very stiff with size, used for the framework of ladies' bonnets, for the
inside of belts and collars of dresses, and for bookbinding: stiffness in
manners and appearance.--_adj._ made of buckram: stiff: precise.--_v.t._ to
give the quality of buckram. [O. Fr. _boquerant_.]

BUCKSHISH. Same as BACKSHEESH.

BUCKWHEAT, buk'hw[=e]t, _n._ a species of Polygonum, grown in Germany,
Brittany, &c., for feeding horses, cattle, and poultry--buckwheat cakes are
esteemed on American breakfast-tables. [Prob. Dut. _boekweit_, or Ger.
_buckweize_.]

BUCOLIC, -AL, b[=u]-kol'ik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to the tending of
cattle: pastoral: rustic, countrified.--_n._ BUCOL'IC, a pastoral poem.
[L.--Gr. _boukolikos_--_boukolos_, a herdsman.]

BUD, bud, _n._ the first shoot of a tree or plant: used of young people, as
a term of endearment.--_v.i._ to put forth buds: to begin to grow.--_v.t._
to put forth as buds: to graft, as a plant, by inserting a bud under the
bark of another tree:--_pr.p._ bud'ding; _pa.p._ bud'ded.--_n._ BUD'DING, a
method of propagation by means of buds.--_adjs._ BUD'DY; BUD'LESS.--TO NIP
IN THE BUD, to destroy at its very beginning. [M. E. _budde_; prob. related
to Dut. _bot_, a bud.]

BUDDHA, b[=oo]d'da, _n._ an epithet applied to Sakyamuni or Gautama, the
founder of the Buddhist religion.--_ns._ BUD'DHISM, the religion founded by
Buddha; BUD'DHIST, a believer in Buddhism.--_adjs._ BUDDHIST'IC, BUD'DHIST,
pertaining to Buddhism.--ESOTERIC BUDDHISM (see THEOSOPHY). [Sans.
_buddha_, wise, from _budh_, to know.]

BUDDLE, bud'l, _v.t._ to wash ore with a _buddle_ or inclined hutch over
which water flows.

BUDGE, buj, _v.i._ and _v.t._ to move or stir.--_n._ BUDG'ER, one who
stirs. [Fr. _bouger_--It. _bulicare_, to boil, to bubble--L. _bullire_.]

BUDGE, buj, _n._ lambskin fur.--_adj._ pompous: stiff. [Derivation
unknown.]

BUDGET, buj'et, _n._ a sack with its contents: a compact collection of
things: a socket in which the end of a cavalry carbine rests: that
miscellaneous collection of matters which aggregate into the annual
financial statement made to parliament by the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
[Fr. _bougette_, dim. of _bouge_, a pouch--L. _bulga_.]

BUFF, buf, _n._ a pliant and uncracking leather used for soldiers' belts
and other military purposes, made out of salted and dried South American
light ox and cow hides: a military coat: the colour of buff: a light
yellow: the bare skin: (_pl._) certain regiments in the British army, so
named from their buff-coloured facings--e.g. East Kent Regiment, Ross-shire
Buffs.--_ns._ BUFF'-COAT, a strong military coat: a soldier; BUFF'-WHEEL,
BUFF'-STICK, a wheel or stick covered with buff-leather or the like, and
sprinkled with emery, for polishing.--IN BUFF, naked. [Fr. _buffle_, a
buffalo.]

BUFF, buf, _n._ (_obs._) a buffet, blow, or stroke.--_v.t._ to strike. [O.
Fr. _buffe_, a blow.]

BUFFALO, buf'a-l[=o], _n._ a genus of the ox kind, the tame, often
domesticated Asiatic buffalo, and the entirely wild and fierce Cape
buffalo. The so-called American buffalo is really a 'bison.' [It.
_buffalo_, through L. from Gr. _boubalos_.]

BUFFER, buf'[.e]r, _n._ a mechanical apparatus for deadening the force of a
concussion, as in railway carriages: a fellow, as in 'old buffer.'--_n._
BUFF'ER-STATE, a neutral country lying between two others, whose relations
are or may become strained.

BUFFET, buf'et, _n._ a blow with the fist, a slap.--_v.t._ to strike with
the hand or fist: to contend against.--_n._ BUFF'ETING, a striking with the
hand, boxing: contention. [O. Fr. _bufet_--_bufe_, a blow, esp. on the
cheek.]

BUFFET, buf'et, _n._ a kind of sideboard: a low stool: a refreshment-bar
(in this sense often pronounced buf'[=a]). [Fr. _buffet_; origin unknown.]

BUFFOON, buf-[=oo]n', _n._ one who amuses by jests, grimaces, &c.: a clown:
a fool.--_ns._ BUFF'O, the comic actor in an opera; BUFFOON'ERY, the
practices of a buffoon; ludicrous or vulgar jesting. [Fr. _bouffon_--It.
_buffone_, _buffare_, to jest.]

BUG, bug, _n._ an object of terror.--_ns._ BIG-BUG (_slang_), an
aristocrat; BUG'ABOO, a bogy, or object of terror; BUG'BEAR, an object of
terror, generally imaginary.--_adj._ causing fright. [M. E. _bugge_, prob.
W. _bwg_, a hobgoblin.]

BUG, bug, _n._ a name applied loosely to certain insects, esp. to one
(_Cimex lectularius_) that infests houses and beds: in America applied to
any insect.

BUGGERY, bug'g[.e]r-i, _n._ the crime of bestiality, unnatural vice. [Fr.
_bougre_--L. _Bulgarus_, a Bulgarian, a heretic.]

BUGGY, bug'i, _n._ a name given to several kinds of light carriages or
gigs--in America, a light one-horse, four-wheeled vehicle with one seat; in
England, two-wheeled; in India, provided with a hood to ward off the sun.
[By some conn. with BOGIE; ety. really quite unknown.]

BUGLE, b[=u]'gl, BUGLE-HORN, b[=u]'gl-horn, _n._ a hunting-horn, originally
a buffalo-horn: a treble musical instrument, usually made of copper, like
the trumpet, but having the bell less expanded and the tube shorter and
more conical: (_Spens._) a buffalo or wild ox--dim. B[=U]'GLET.--_v.i._
B[=U]'GLE, to sound a bugle.--_n._ B[=U]'GLER, one who plays upon the
bugle. [O. Fr. _bugle_;--L. _buculus_, dim. of _bos_, an ox.]

BUGLE, b[=u]'gl, _n._ a slender elongated kind of bead, usually
black.--_adj._ (_Shak._) like bugles. [Prob. conn. with Low L. _bugulus_;
prob. obscurely conn. with Dut. _beugel_, a ring.]

BUGLE, b[=u]'gl, _n._ a palæarctic genus of plants of the natural order
_Labiatæ_, with blue or sometimes white or purple flowers. [Fr., It.
_bugola_--Low L. _bugula_, _bugillo_.]

BUGLOSS, b[=u]'glos, _n._ a name popularly applied to many plants of the
natural order _Boragineæ_, more strictly to _Anchusa arvensis_, a common
weed in corn-fields in Britain. [Fr. _buglosse_--L. _buglossa_--Gr.
_bougl[=o]ssos_--_bous_, ox, _gl[=o]ssa_, tongue.]

BUGONG, b[=u]'gong, _n._ a noctuoid moth.

BUHL, b[=u]l, _n._ unburnished gold, brass, or mother-of-pearl worked in
patterns for inlaying: furniture ornamented with such. [From André Charles
_Boule_ (1642-1732), a cabinet-maker in the service of Louis XIV.]

BUHRSTONE, bur'st[=o]n, _n._ a variety of quartz, containing many small
empty cells, which give it a peculiar roughness of surface, particularly
adapting it for millstones.--Often BURR'-STONE. [Perh. conn. with BURR,
from its roughness.]

BUILD, bild, _v.t._ to erect, as a house or bridge: to form or construct,
as a railway, &c.--_v.i._ to depend (with _on_, _upon_):--_pa.p._ built or
build'ed.--_n._ construction: make.--_ns._ BUILD'ER, one who builds, or who
controls the actual work of building; BUILD'ING, the art of erecting
houses, &c.: anything built: a house.--_p.adj._ BUILT, formed or
shaped.--BUILD IN, to enclose by building; BUILD UP, to close up by
building, as a door: to erect any edifice, as a reputation: to edify
spiritually, as the church. [A.S. _gebyld_, _bold_, a dwelling, from an
assumed _byldan_, to build.]

BUIRDLY, bürd'li, _adj._ stalwart, large and well made. [_Scot._, a variant
of BURLY.]

BUISSON, bw[=e]-song, _n._ a fruit-tree trained on a low stem, the branches
closely pruned. [Fr.]

BUIST, büst, _n._ (_Scot._) a mark put on sheep or cattle to indicate
ownership: a box.--_v.t._ to mark with such. [Ety. dub.]

BUKSHI, BUKSHEE, buk'sh[=e], _n._ the paymaster in native Indian states.
[Hind. _bakshi_--_baksh_, pay.]

BULB, bulb, _n._ an onion-like root: any protuberance or enlargement
resembling such.--_v.i._ to form bulbs: to bulge out or swell.--_adjs._
BUL'BAR, BULBED, BUL'BOUS, BULB[=A]'CEOUS, BULB'IFORM, BULBIF'EROUS,
BUL'BOSE, BUL'BY.--_ns._ BUL'BULE, a little bulb: a young bulb which grows
from an old one; BUL'BUS, a bulb. [L. _bulbus_--Gr. _bolbos_, an onion.]

BULBUL, bool'bool, _n._ the Persian nightingale. [Arab.]

BULDERING, bul'der-ing, _adj._ (_prov._) hot, sultry.

BULGARIAN, bul-g[=a]'ri-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Bulgaria_ or its
language.--_n._ a native of Bulgaria: the Bulgarian language
(Slavonic).--_n._ BUL'GAR, a member of an ancient Finnic or Ugrian tribe
which moved from the Volga towards Bulgaria.--_adj._ BULGAR'IC.--_n._ the
ancient language of the foregoing.

BULGE, bulj, _n._ the widest part of a cask, a round protuberance,
swelling.--_v.i._ to swell out.--_ns._ BUL'GER, a wooden golf-club with a
convex face; BUL'GINESS.--_adj._ BUL'GY--TO GET THE BULGE ON ONE (_slang_),
to get a decided advantage over a person. [O. Fr. _boulge_, prob. L.
_bulga_, a leather knapsack; a Gallic word.]

BULIMY, b[=u]l'i-mi, _n._ an unnatural hunger. [Gr.; _bous_, ox, _limos_,
hunger.]

BULK, bulk, _n._ a stall or framework built in front of a shop.--_n._
BULK'ER, a street thief or strumpet. [Ety. dub.; Prof. Skeat suggests
Scand. _bálk-r_, beam, and Dr Murray quotes also an A.S. _bolca_, gangway
of a ship.]

BULK, bulk, _n._ magnitude or size: the greater part: any huge body or
structure: the whole cargo in the hold of a ship.--_v.i._ to be in bulk: to
be of weight or importance.--_v.t._ to put or hold in bulk.--_ns._
BULK'HEAD, a partition separating one part of the interior of a ship from
another, either transverse or longitudinal, and usually made watertight;
BULK'INESS.--_adj._ BULK'Y, having bulk: of great size,
unwieldy.--COLLISION BULKHEAD, that nearest the bow--usually the only one
in sailing-ships.--TO LOAD IN BULK, to put the cargo in loose; TO SELL IN
BULK, to sell the cargo as it is in the hold: to sell in large quantities.
[Prob. Scand.; Ice. _bulki_, a heap.]

BULL, bool, _n._ the male of the ox kind: an old male whale, fur-seal, &c.:
a sign of the zodiac: one who tries artificially and unduly to raise the
price of stocks, and speculates on a rise.--_adj._ denoting largeness of
size--used in composition, as bull-trout: favourable to the bulls,
rising.--_v.t._ to try to raise, as the price of shares, artificially: to
copulate with a cow, of a bull.--_v.i._ to be in heat, of a cow.--_ns._
BULL'-BAITING, the sport of baiting or exciting bulls with dogs; BULL'-BAT
(_U.S._), the night-hawk or goat-sucker; BULL'-BEEF, the beef or flesh of
bulls, coarse beef: (_Shak._, in _pl._) BULL'-BEEVES; BULL'-BEGG'AR, a
hobgoblin, &c.; BULL'-CALF, a male calf: a stupid fellow, a lout;
BULL'-DANCE, a dance of men only; BULL'DOG, a breed of dogs of great
courage, formerly used for baiting bulls, its general appearance that of a
smooth-coated, compact dog, low in stature, but broad and powerful, with a
massive head, large in proportion to its body: a person of obstinate
courage: a short-barrelled revolver of large calibre: a proctor's attendant
at Oxford and Cambridge.--_v.t._ BULL'-DOSE (_U.S._) to intimidate, bully:
flog.--_n._ BULL'-D[=O]S'ER.--_adj._ BULL'-FACED, having a large
face.--_ns._ BULL'-FIGHT, a popular spectacle in Spain, in which a bull is
goaded to fury in a kind of circus by mounted _picadores_ armed with
lances, and finally despatched by a specially skilful _espada_ or
swordsman; BULL'-FIGHT'ER; BULL'-FINCH, a species of red-breasted finch a
little larger than the common linnet, closely allied to the grossbeaks and
crossbills: a kind of hedge hard to jump; BULL'-FROG, a large North
American frog.--_adj._ BULL'-FRONT'ED, having a front or forehead like a
bull.--_n._ BULL'-HEAD, or _Miller's Thumb_, a small river fish remarkable
for its large, flat head.--_adj._ BULL'-HEAD'ED, impetuous and
obstinate.--_n._ BULL'-HEAD'EDNESS.--_adj._ BULL'ISH.--_ns._ BULL'OCK, an
ox or castrated bull; BULL'-ROAR'ER, a provincial English name for a boy's
plaything, made of an oblong piece of wood, to one end of which a string is
tied, then twisted tightly round the finger, when the whole is whirled
rapidly round and round until a loud and peculiar whirring noise is
produced--the native Australian _turndun_, the _rhombos_ of the Greek
mysteries; BULL'S'-EYE, the central boss formed in making a sheet of blown
glass (hence _adj._ BULL'S'-EYED), a round piece of glass in a lantern, a
policeman's lantern, a round opening or window: the centre of a target, of
a different colour from the rest, and usually round: a thick lump of
coloured or striped candy; BULL'-TERR'IER, a species of dog, a cross-breed
between the bulldog and the terrier; BULL'-TROUT, a large trout of the
salmon genus, also migratory in its habits, often called the _Gray Trout_;
BULL'-WHACK, a heavy whip.--_v.t._ to lash with such.--_n._ BULL'WORT, the
bishop's weed.--BULL INTO, to plunge hastily into.--A BULL IN A CHINA-SHOP,
a synonym for a man who does harm through ignorance or fury, a man
completely out of place.--TAKE THE BULL BY THE HORNS, to face a danger or
difficulty with courage, to take the initiative boldly in a struggle. [M.E.
_bole_, prob. Scand. _bole_, _boli_; most prob. cog. with BELLOW.]

BULL, bool, _n._ an edict of the pope which has his seal affixed.--_adj._
BULLAN'TIC--_n._ BULL'ARY, a collection of papal bulls. [L. _bulla_, a
knob, a leaden seal.]

BULL, bool, _n._ a ludicrous blunder in speech implying some obvious
absurdity or contradiction, often said to be an especial prerogative of
Irishmen--'I was a fine child, but they changed me.' [Prob. O. Fr. _boul_,
cheat.]

BULL, bool, _n._ drink made by pouring water into a cask that had held
liquor.

BULLA, bool'a, _n._ a round metal ornament worn by ancient Roman children:
a seal attached to a document: anything rounded or globular. [L.]

BULLACE, bool'l[=a]s, _n._ a shrub closely allied to the sloe and the plum,
its fruit making excellent pies or tarts. [O. Fr. _beloce_, of uncertain
origin; prob. Celt.]

BULLATE, bul'[=a]t, _adj._ blistered, inflated--_ns._ BULL[=A]'TION;
BULLES'CENCE.

BULLARY, bul'a-ri, _n._ a house in which salt is prepared by boiling.

BULLER, bool'er, _n._ the boiling of a torrent. [Dan. _bulder_.]

BULLET, bool'et, _n._ the projectile of lead or other metal discharged from
any kind of small-arm: a plumb or sinker in fishing.--_n._ BULL'ET-HEAD, a
head round like a bullet: (_U.S._) an obstinate fellow.--_adjs._
BULL'ET-HEAD'ED; BULL'ET-PROOF, proof against bullets. [Fr. _boulet_, dim.
of _boule_, a ball--L. _bulla_. See BULL, an edict.]

BULLETIN, bool'e-tin, _n._ an official report of public news. [Fr.,--It.
_bullettino_.]

BULLION, bool'yun, _n._ gold and silver in the mass and uncoined, though
occasionally used as practically synonymous with the precious metals,
coined and uncoined: a heavy twisted cord fringe, often covered with gold
or silver wire.--_n._ BULL'IONIST, one in favour of an exclusive metallic
currency. [Ety. dub.; but apparently related to Low L. _bullio_, a boiling,
melting.]

BULLY, bool'i, _n._ a blustering, noisy, overbearing fellow: a ruffian
hired to beat or intimidate any one: a fellow who lives upon the gains of a
prostitute: (_obs._) a term of familiarity to either man or woman.--_adj._
blustering: brisk: (_U.S._) first-rate.--_v.i._ to bluster.--_v.t._ to
threaten in a noisy way:--_pr.p._ bull'ying; _pa.p._ bull'ied.--_n._
BULL'YISM.--_v.t._ BULL'YRAG (_coll._), to assail with abusive language, to
overawe.--_ns._ BULL'YRAGGING; BULL'Y-ROOK, a bully.--BULLY FOR YOU, bravo!
[Perh. Dut. _boel_, a lover; cf. Ger. _buhle_.]

BULLY, bool'i, _n._ a miner's hammer.

BULLY-TREE, bool'i-tr[=e], _n._ a name given to several West Indian
sapotaceous trees yielding good timber.--Also BULL'ET-TREE, BULL'ETRIE,
BOLL'ETRIE.

BULRUSH, bool'rush, _n._ a large strong rush, which grows on wet land or in
water--often applied to the cat's-tail (_Typha_).--_adj._ BUL'RUSHY.

BULSE, buls, _n._ a bag for diamonds, &c.: a package or certain quantity of
such. [Port. _bolsa_--Low L. _bursa_, a purse. See PURSE.]

BULWARK, bool'wark, _n._ a fortification or rampart: a breakwater or
sea-wall: any means of defence or security.--_v.t._ to defend. [Cf. Ger.
_bollwerk_.]

BUM, bum, _n._ (_Shak._) the buttocks.--_ns._ BUM'-BAIL'IFF, an
under-bailiff; BUM'-BOAT, boat for carrying provisions to a ship,
originally a Thames scavenger's boat. [Ety. dub., prob. from _bump_, from
sense of 'swelling.']

BUM, bum, _v.i._ to hum or make a murmuring sound, as a bee: (_slang_) to
live dissolutely.--_pr.p._ bum'ming; _pa.p._ bummed.--_n._ a humming sound:
a spree, debauch: a dissipated fellow. [Onomatopoeic.]

BUMBAZE, bum'b[=a]z, _v.t._ to confound, bamboozle.

BUMBLE-BEE, bum'bl-b[=e], _n._ a large kind of bee that makes a bumming or
humming noise: the humble-bee.--_n._ BUM'-CLOCK (_Scot._), a drone-beetle.
[M. E. _bumble_, freq. of BUM, and BEE.]

BUMBLEDOM, bum'bl-dom, _n._ fussy pomposity. [From _Bumble_, name of the
beadle in Dickens's _Oliver Twist_.]

BUMBLE-FOOT, bum'bl-foot, _n._ a disease of domestic fowls, marked by
inflammation of the ball of the foot: a club-foot.--_adj._ BUM'BLE-FOOT'ED,
club-footed.

BUMBLE-PUPPY, bum'bl-pup'i, _n._ whist played regardless of rules: the game
of nine-holes.--_n._ BUM'BLE-PUPP'IST, one who plays whist without knowing
the game.

BUMBO, bum'b[=o], _n._ a punch of rum or gin with sugar, nutmeg, &c.

BUMKIN, BUMPKIN, bum'kin, _n._ a short beam of timber projecting from each
bow of a ship, for the purpose of extending the lower corner of the
foresail to windward: a small outrigger over the stern of a boat, usually
serving to extend the mizzen. [From BOOM, and dim. termination _kin_.]

BUMMALO, bum'a-l[=o], _n._ a small fish dried and salted all round the
coast of India--_Bombay duck_ and _nehar_.--Also BUMMAL[=O]'TI. [East Ind.]

BUMMAREE, bum'ar-[=e], _n._ a middleman in the Billingsgate fish-market.
[Ety. unknown: hardly the Fr. _bonne marée_, good fresh sea-fish.]

BUMMER, bum'[.e]r, _n._ a plundering straggler or camp-follower during the
American Civil War: a dissolute fellow, a loafer, a sponge.

BUMMLE, bum'l, _v.i._ (_prov._) to blunder.--_n._ an idle fellow.

BUMMOCK, bum'ok, _n._ (_Scot._) a brewing of ale. [Ety. unknown.]

BUMP, bump, _v.i._ to make a heavy or loud noise.--_v.t._ to strike with a
dull sound: to strike against: to overtake and impinge upon the stern or
side of a boat by the boat following, the bumper consequently taking the
place of the bumped in rank--also 'to make a bump:' to spread out material
in printing so as to fill any desired number of pages.--_n._ a dull heavy
blow: a thump: a lump caused by a blow, one of the protuberances on the
surface of the skull confidently associated by phrenologists with certain
distinct qualities or propensities of the mind, hence colloquially for
organ: the noise of the bittern.--_n._ BUMP'ER, a cup or glass filled to
the brim for drinking a toast: anything large or generous in measure: a
crowded house at a theatre or concert.--_adj._ as in a 'bumper
house.'--_v.i._ to drink bumpers.--_n._ BUMPOL'OGY, phrenology.--_adj._
BUMP'Y. [Onomatopoeic.]

BUMPKIN, bump'kin, _n._ an awkward, clumsy rustic: a clown.--_adj._
BUMP'KINISH. [Prob. Dut. _boomken_, a log.]

BUMPTIOUS, bump'shus, _adj._ offensively self-assertive.--_adv._
BUMP'TIOUSLY.--_n._ BUMP'TIOUSNESS. [Prob. formed from BUMP.]

BUN, bun, _n._ a kind of sweet cake. [Prob. from O. Fr. _bugne_, a
swelling.]

BUN, bun, _n._ a dry stalk: a hare's scut: a rabbit. [Prob. Gael. _bun_, a
root.]

BUNCE, buns, _n._ (_slang_) extra gain--used as an interjection.

BUNCH, bunsh, _n._ a number of things tied together or growing together: a
definite quantity fastened together, as of linen yarn (180,000 yards), &c.:
a cluster: something in the form of a tuft or knot.--_v.i._ to swell out in
a bunch.--_v.t._ to make a bunch of, to concentrate.--_adjs._ BUNCH'-BACKED
(_Shak._), having a bunch on the back, crook-backed; BUNCHED, humped,
protuberant.--_ns._ BUNCH'-GRASS, a name applied to several West American
grasses, growing in clumps; BUNCH'INESS, the quality of being bunchy: state
of growing in bunches.--_adj._ BUNCH'Y, growing in bunches or like a bunch,
bulging.--BUNCH OF FIVES, the fist with the five fingers clenched. [Ety.
obscure.]

BUNCOMBE. See BUNKUM.

BUNDESRATH, b[=oo]n'des-rät, _n._ the Federal Council of the German Empire,
its members annually appointed by the governments of the various states.

BUNDLE, bun'dl, _n._ a number of things loosely bound together: an
aggregation of one or more kinds of tissue traversing other tissues: a
definite measure or quantity, as two reams of paper, twenty hanks of linen
yarn, &c.--_v.t._ to bind or tie into bundles.--_v.i._ to pack up one's
things for a journey, to go hurriedly or in confusion (with _away_, _off_,
_out_).--_n._ BUN'DLING, an old custom in Wales, New England, and elsewhere
for sweethearts to sleep on the same bed without undressing.--TO BUNDLE
OFF, BUNDLE OUT, to send away unceremoniously or summarily. [Conn. with
BIND and BOND.]

BUNG, bung, _n._ the stopper of the hole in a barrel: a large cork:
(_Shak._) a sharper.--_v.t._ to stop up with a bung: to thrash
severely.--_ns._ BUNG'-HOLE, a hole in a cask through which it is filled,
closed by a bung; BUNG'-VENT, a small hole in a bung to let gasses escape,
&c.--BUNG UP, to bruise. [Ety. dub.]

BUNGALOW, bung'ga-l[=o], _n._ the kind of house usually occupied by
Europeans in the interior of India, and commonly provided for officers'
quarters in cantonments.--DÂK-BUNGALOWS are houses for travellers. [Hind.
_bangl[=a]_, Bengalese.]

BUNGLE, bung'l, _n._ anything clumsily done: a gross blunder.--_v.i._ to
act in a clumsy, awkward manner.--_v.t._ to make or mend clumsily: to
manage awkwardly.--_p.adj._ BUNG'LED, done clumsily.--_n._
BUNG'LER.--_p.adj._ BUNG'LING, clumsy, awkward: unskilfully or ill
done.--_adv._ BUNG'LINGLY. [Ety. obscure; prob. onomatopoeic; Prof. Skeat
quotes a dial. Sw. _bangla_, to work ineffectually; Mr F. Hindes Groome
suggests Gipsy _bongo_, left, awkward.]

BUNION, bun'yun, _n._ a lump or inflamed swelling on the ball of the great
toe. [Ety. unknown; Prof. Skeat suggests It. _bugnone_, a botch.]

BUNK, bungk, _n._ a box or recess in a ship's cabin, a sleeping-berth
anywhere.--_v.i._ to occupy the same bunk, sleep together.--_n._ BUNK'ER, a
large bin or chest used for stowing various things, as coals, &c.: a hazard
in a golf-links, originally confined to sand-pits, but now often used for
hazards generally. [Prob. of Scand. origin; cf. Ice. _bunki_, Dan. _bunke_,
a heap.]

BUNKO, BUNCO, bung'k[=o], _n._ (_U.S._) a form of confidence-trick by which
a simple fellow is swindled or taken somewhere and robbed.--_v.t._ to rob
or swindle in such a way.--_n._ BUNK'O-STEER'ER, that one of the swindling
confederates who allures the victim.

BUNKUM, bung'kum, _n._ empty clap-trap oratory, bombastic speechmaking
intended for the newspapers rather than to persuade the audience.--Also
BUN'COMBE. [From _Buncombe_, the name of a county in North Carolina.
Bartlett quotes a story of how its member once went on talking in congress,
explaining apologetically to the few hearers that remained that he was
'only talking for Buncombe.']

BUNNY, bun'i, _n._ a pet name for a rabbit. [Ety. unknown; prob. conn. with
Gael. _bun_, a root.]

BUNODONT, b[=u]'n[=o]-dont, _adj._ having tuberculate molars--opp. to
_Lophodont_. [Gr. _bounos_, a rounded hill, _odous_, _odontos_, a tooth.]

BUNSEN, b[=oo]n'sen, or bun'sen, _adj._ applied to some of the inventions
of the great chemist, R. W. _Bunsen_ of Heidelberg.--_n._ BUN'SEN-BURN'ER,
a gas-burner in which a plentiful supply of air is caused to mingle with
the gas before ignition, so that a smokeless flame of low luminosity but
great heating power is the result.

BUNT, bunt, _n._ a parasitic disease of wheat and other grains.--_adjs._
BUNT'ED, BUNT'Y. [Ety. unknown.]

BUNT, bunt, _n._ the bagging part of a fishing-net, a sail, &c.--_v.i._ to
belly, as a sail. [Ety. unknown.]

BUNT, bunt, _v.i._ to push with the horns, butt: to spring, rear.--_n._ a
push.--_n._ BUNT'ING, pushing: a boys' game, played with sticks and a small
piece of wood: a strong timber, a stout prop.

BUNTER, bunt'[.e]r, _n._ a rag-picker, a low woman.

BUNTING, bunt'ing, _n._ a thin worsted stuff of which ships' colours are
made. [Ety. dub.]

BUNTING, bunt'ing, _n._ a genus of birds in the Finch family nearly allied
to the crossbills.

BUNTLINE, bunt'l[=i]n, _n._ a rope passing from the foot-rope of a square
sail, led up to the masthead and thence on deck, to help in hauling the
sail up to the yard.

BUOY, boi, _n._ a floating cask or light piece of wood fastened by a rope
or chain to indicate shoals, the position of a ship's anchor, &c.--_v.t._
to fix buoys or marks: to keep afloat, bear up, or sustain: to raise the
spirits.--_ns._ BUOY'AGE, a series of buoys or floating beacons to mark the
course for vessels: the providing of buoys; BUOY'ANCY, capacity for
floating lightly on water or in the air: specific lightness: (_fig._)
lightness of spirit, cheerfulness.--_adj._ BUOY'ANT, light: cheerful.--_n._
BUOY'ANTNESS. [Dut. _boei_, buoy, fetter, through Romance forms (Norman
_boie_), from Low L. _boia_, a collar of leather.]

BUPHAGA, b[=u]'f[=a]-ga, _n._ a small genus of African perching birds,
nearly related to the starlings, feeding on the larvæ of gadflies and the
like, which they find on the backs of cattle, camels, &c.--Also
_Beef-eater_ and _Ox-pecker_. [Gr., _bous_, an ox, _phagein_, to eat.]

BUPRESTIS, b[=u]-pres'tis, _n._ a genus of beetles, typical of a large
family, _Buprestidæ_, those occurring in warmer countries having lively
colour and metallic sheen--some known as Golden Beetles. [L.,--Gr.
_bouprestis_, _bous_, an ox, _pr[=e]thein_, to swell.]

BUR, BURR, bur, the prickly seed-case or head of certain plants, which
sticks to clothes: any impediment or inconvenient adherent: any lump,
ridge, &c., more or less sharp, a knot on a tree, knot in thread, knob at
the base of a deer's horn, &c.: waste raw silk: the sweetbread or pancreas:
(_Scot._) club-moss: the name for various tools and appliances, as the
triangular chisel for clearing the corners of mortises, &c.: the blank
driven out of a piece of sheet-metal by a punch: a partly vitrified
brick.--_ns._ BUR'DOCK, a dock with a bur or prickly head; BUR'-THIS'TLE,
the spear-thistle.--BUR IN THE THROAT, something seeming to stick in the
throat, producing a choking sensation. [Cog. with Dan. _borre_, a bur.]

BUR, BURR, bur, _n._ the rough sound of _r_ pronounced in the throat, as in
Northumberland--_v.i._ to whisper hoarsely, to murmur. [Usually associated
with preceding, but perh. from the sound.]

BUR, bur, _n._ in an engraving, a slight ridge of metal raised on the edges
of a line by the graver or the dry point, producing an effect like a smear,
but dexterously used by some etchers, as Rembrandt, to deepen their
shadows.

BURBLE, burb'l, _n._ trouble, disorder.--_v.t._ to trouble, confuse.
[Scot.; prob. conn. with O. Fr. _barbouiller_, to confound.]

BURBOT, bur'bot, _n._ a fresh-water fish, like the eel, having a longish
beard on its lower jaw. [Fr. _barbote_--L. _barba_, a beard.]

BURD, burd, _n._ (_obs._) for BIRD, a poetic name for a girl or lady.--_n._
BUR'DALANE, the last surviving child of a family.

BURDASH, burd'ash, _n._ a fringed sash worn round the waist by fine
gentlemen in the time of Anne and George I.

BURDEN, bur'dn, _n._ a load: weight: cargo: that which is grievous,
oppressive, or difficult to bear, as blame, sin, sorrow, &c.:
birth.--_v.t._ to load: to oppress: to encumber.--_adjs._ BUR'DENOUS,
BUR'DENSOME, heavy: oppressive.--BURDEN OF PROOF, in legal procedure,
signifies the obligation to establish by evidence certain disputed facts.
[A.S. _byrthen_--_beran_, to bear.]

BURDEN, bur'dn, _n._ part of a song repeated at the end of every stanza,
refrain: the leading idea of anything: a load of care, sorrow, or
responsibility. [Fr. _bourdon_, a humming tone in music--Low L. _burdo_, a
drone or non-working bee.]

BURDEN, bur'dn, _n._ (_Spens._) a pilgrim's staff. [See BOURDON.]

BURDOCK. See BUR (1).

BUREAU, b[=u]r'[=o], _n._ a writing-table or chest of drawers: a room or
office where such a table is used: a department for the transacting of
public business:--_pl._ BUREAUX (b[=u]r'[=o]), BUREAUS (b[=u]r'[=o]z). [Fr.
_bureau_--O. Fr. _burel_, russet cloth--L. _burrus_, red.]

BUREAUCRACY, b[=u]r[=o]'kras-i, _n._ a system of government centralised in
graded series of officials, responsible only to their chiefs, and
controlling every detail of public and private life.--_ns._ BUREAU'CRAT,
BUREAU'CRATIST, one who advocates government by bureaucracy.--_adj._
BUREAUCRAT'IC, relating to or having the nature of a bureaucracy.--_adv._
BUREAUCRAT'ICALLY. [BUREAU, and Gr. _kratein_, to govern.]

BURETTE, b[=u]-ret', _n._ a flask-shaped vessel for holding liquids, an
altar-cruet. [Fr.]

BURGAGE, bur'g[=a]j, _n._ a tenure in socage for a yearly rent: a tenure in
Scotland in royal burghs under nominal service of watching. [O. Fr.]

BURGAMOT. Same as BERGAMOT.

BURGANET, bur'ga-net, _n._ a 16th-century helmet.--Also BUR'GONET. [Lit.
'Burgundian.']

BURGEE, bur'j[=e], _n._ a swallow-tailed flag or pennant: a kind of small
coal for furnaces.

BURGEON, bur'jun, _n._ and _v.i._ Same as BOURGEON.

BURGH, bur'[=o], _n._ the Scotch word corresponding to the English
BOROUGH.--_ns._ BURG (same as BOROUGH); BURG'AGE, a system of tenure where
the king or other person is lord of an ancient borough, city, or town, by
which the citizens hold their lands or tenements, for a certain annual
rent; BURGESS (bur'jes), BUR'GHER, an inhabitant of a borough: a citizen or
freeman: a magistrate of certain towns: one able to take the usual
burgesses' oath (see ANTIBURGHER).--_adj._ BUR'GHAL, relating to a
burgh.--_n._ BURG'OMASTER, the chief magistrate of a German or a Dutch
borough, answering to the English term mayor.--BURGH OF BARONY, a
corporation consisting of the inhabitants of a determinate tract of land
within the _barony_, and municipally governed by magistrates and a council
whose election is either vested in the baron superior of the district, or
vested in the inhabitants themselves; BURGH OF REGALITY, a burgh of barony,
spiritual or temporal, enfranchised by crown charter, with regal or
exclusive criminal jurisdiction within their own
territories.--PARLIAMENTARY BURGH, one like Paisley, Greenock, Leith, whose
boundaries, as first fixed in 1832, were adopted for municipal purposes,
with regard to which they stand practically in the same position as royal
burghs; POLICE BURGH, a burgh constituted by the sheriff for purposes of
improvement and police, the local authority being the police commissioners;
ROYAL BURGH, a corporate body deriving its existence, constitution, and
rights from a royal charter, such being either actual and express, or
presumed to have existed.

BURGLAR, burg'lar, _n._ one who breaks into a house by night to
steal.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to commit burglary.--_adj._
BURGL[=A]R'IOUS.--_adv._ BURGL[=A]R'IOUSLY.--_v.t._ BURG'LARISE.--_n._
BURG'LARY, breaking into a house by night to steal. [Ety. dub.]

BURGONET. See BURGANET.

BURGOO, bur'g[=oo], _n._ a dish made of boiled oatmeal seasoned with salt,
butter, and sugar, used by seamen. [Derivation unknown.]

BURGRAVE, bur'gr[=a]v, _n._ the governor of a town or castle. [Ger.
_burg_-_graf_.]

BURGUNDY, bur'gun-di, _n._ a generous French red wine, so called from
_Burgundy_, the district where it is made.

BURIAL, ber'i-al, _n._ the act of laying a dead body in the grave:
interment.--_ns._ BUR'IAL-AISLE, an aisle in a church used for burials;
BUR'IAL-GROUND, BUR'IAL-PLACE, a piece of ground set apart for
burying.--BURIAL SERVICE, a religious service or form of ritual
accompanying a burial; BURIAL SOCIETY, an insurance society for providing
the expenses of burial. [A.S. _byrgels_, a tomb. See BURY.]

BURIN, b[=u]r'in, _n._ a kind of chisel of tempered steel, used in copper
engraving--the distinctive style of a master is frequently described by
such expressions as a _soft_, a _graphic_, or a _brilliant_ burin.--_n._
BUR'INIST, an engraver. [Fr.; from root of BORE.]

BURKE, burk, _v.t._ to murder, esp. by stifling: hence (_fig._) to put an
end to quietly. [From _Burke_, an Edinburgh Irishman (hanged 1829), who
committed the crime in order to sell the bodies of his victims for
dissection.]

BURL, burl, _n._ a small knot in thread, a knot in wood.--_v.t._ to pick
knots, &c., from, in finishing cloth.--_ns._ BUR'LING-[=I]'RON;
BUR'LING-MACHINE'.--_adj._ BUR'LY, knotty.

BURLAP, bur'lap, _n._ a coarse canvas for wrappings, &c.--usually in _pl._
[Origin unknown.]

BURLESQUE, bur-lesk', _n._ a ludicrous representation--in speaking, acting,
writing, drawing--a low and rude grade of the comic, whose legitimate
office is to turn to laughter pretension and affectation.--_adj._ jocular:
comical.--_v.t._ to turn into burlesque: to ridicule.--_p.adj._
BURLESQUED', caricatured.--_adv._ BURLESQUE'LY. [It. _burlesco_; prob. from
Low L. _burra_, a flock of wool, a trifle.]

BURLETTA, bur-let'a, _n._ a musical farce: comic opera. [It.;--dim. of
_burla_, a jest.]

BURLY, bur'li, _adj._ bulky: boisterous, bluff.--_n._ BUR'LINESS. [M. E.
_borlich_; prob. Old High Ger. _burl[=i]h_, high, _b[=o]r_, a height.]

BURMESE, bur'm[=e]z, _adj._ relating to _Burma_ in Farther India, or its
language.--_n._ a native of Burma, or the language of Burma--also BUR'MAN.

BURN, burn, _n._ a small stream or brook: a spring or fountain. [A.S.
_burna_; cog. with Dut. and Ger. _born_.]

BURN, burn, _v.t._ to consume or injure by fire.--_v.i._ to be on fire: to
feel excess of heat: to be inflamed with passion:--_pa.p._ burned or
burnt.--_n._ a hurt or mark caused by fire.--_ns._ BURN'ER, the part of a
lamp or gas-jet from which the flame arises; BURN'ING, act of consuming by
fire: conflagration: inflammation.--_adj._ very hot: scorching: ardent:
excessive.--_ns._ BURN'ING-GLASS, a convex lens concentrating the sun's
rays at its focus; BURN'ING-HOUSE, a kiln; BURN'ING-MIRR'OR, a concave
mirror for producing heat by concentrating the sun's rays; BURN'ING-POINT,
the temperature at which a volatile oil in an open vessel will take fire
from a match held close to its surface; BURNT'-EAR, a kind of smut in oats,
wheat, &c., caused by a microscopic fungus; BURNT'-OFF'ERING, something
offered and burned upon an altar as a sacrifice--amongst the Hebrews,
apparently offerings of dedication and to some extent of expiation;
BURNT'-SIENN'A (see SIENNA); BURN'-THE-WIND (_Scot._), a blacksmith.--BURN
A HOLE IN ONE'S POCKET, said of money, when one is eager to spend it; BURN
BLUE, to burn with a bluish flame like that of brimstone; BURN DAYLIGHT
(_Shak._), to waste time in superfluous actions; BURN DOWN, to burn to the
ground; BURN IN, to eat into, as fire: to fix and render durable, as
colours, by means of intense heat, to imprint indelibly on the mind;
BURNING BUSH, the emblem of the Presbyterian churches of Scotland, with the
motto, 'Nec tamen consumebatur,' adopted from Ex. iii. 2, in memory of the
unconquerable courage of the Covenanters under the cruel persecutions of
the 17th century; BURNING QUESTION, one being keenly discussed; BURN ONE'S
BOATS, to cut one's self off, as Cortes did, from all chance of retreat, to
stake everything on success; BURN ONE'S FINGERS, to suffer from interfering
in others' affairs, from embarking in speculations, &c.; BURN OUT, to
destroy by means of burning: to burn till the fire dies down from want of
fuel; BURN THE WATER, to spear salmon by torchlight; BURN UP, to consume
completely by fire: to be burned completely. [A.S.; the weak verb
_boernan_, _boernde_, _boerned_, has been confused with _beornan_,
_byrnan_, _barn_, _bornen_; cf. Ger. _brennen_, to burn.]

BURNET, bur'net, _n._ the English name of two closely united genera of
_Rosaceæ_--the Great Burnet common in meadows all over Europe; the Common
Burnet growing on chalky soils, its slightly astringent leaves used in
salads or soups, also as an ingredient in 'cool tankard.' [From its _brown_
flowers.]

BURNISH, burn'ish, _v.t._ to polish: to make bright by rubbing.--_n._
polish: lustre.--_ns._ BURN'ISHER, an instrument employed in burnishing;
BURN'ISHING; BURN'ISHMENT.

BURNOUS, bur-n[=oo]s', _n._ a mantle with a hood much worn by the Arabs.
[Fr.--Ar. _burnus_.]

BURNT, _pa.p._ of BURN (q.v.).

BURR. Same as BUR (q.v.).

BURREL, bur'el, _n._ a kind of coarse russet cloth in medieval times. [See
BUREAU.]

BURRO, bur'[=o], _n._ a donkey. [Sp.]

BURROCK, bur'ok, _n._ a small weir or dam in a river, to direct the current
toward fish-traps.

BURROW, bur'[=o], _n._ a hole in the ground dug by certain animals for
shelter or defence.--_v.i._ to make holes underground as rabbits: to dwell
in a concealed place.--_ns._ BURR'OW-DUCK, the sheldrake or bergander;
BURR'OWING-OWL, a small long-legged diurnal American owl nesting in
burrows; BURR'OWSTOWN (_Scot._), a town that is a burgh. [Ety. obscure;
prob. a variant of Borough--A.S. _beorgan_, to protect.]

BURSA, bur'sa, _n._ a pouch or sac, esp. a synovial cavity formed where
tendons pass over the harder parts of the body:--_pl._ BUR'SÆ
(-s[=e]).--_adj._ BUR'SAL.--_ns._ BURS[=A]'LIS, a muscle moving the
nictitating membrane, as in birds; BURSAL'OGY, knowledge about the bursæ.
[See BURSAR.]

BURSAR, burs'ar, _n._ one who keeps the purse, a treasurer: in Scotland, a
student maintained at a university by funds derived from endowment.--_adj._
BURSAR'IAL.--_ns._ BURS'ARSHIP, the office of a bursar; BURS'ARY, in
Scotland, the allowance paid to a bursar; BURSE, a purse, an obsolete form
of BOURSE.--_adjs._ BURSIC'ULATE, bursiform: resembling a small pouch, or
provided with such; BURS'IFORM, pouch-shaped. [Low L. _bursarius_--_bursa_,
a purse--Gr. _byrsa_, skin or leather.]

BURSCH, b[=oo]rsh, _n._ a German student:--_pl._ BURSCH'EN.--_n._
BURSCH'ENISM. [Ger. _bursch_, a companion, student.]

BURST, burst, _v.t._ to break into pieces: to break open suddenly or by
violence: to disturb, interrupt.--_v.i._ to fly open or break in pieces: to
break forth or away: to break into some sudden expression of feeling--e.g.
'to burst into song:'--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ burst.--_n._ a sudden outbreak:
a hard gallop: a spurt: a drunken bout.--BURST IN, to force one's way
violently into; BURST INTO BLOSSOM, to begin to blossom; BURST INTO TEARS,
to fall a-crying; BURST OUT, to force one's way out violently; BURST UP
(_coll._), to explode: to fail, become bankrupt.--A BURST UP, a collapse,
failure.--ON THE BURST, on the spree. [A.S. _berstan_; Ger. _bersten_;
Gael. _brisd_, to break.]

BURSTEN, bur'stn, _obs. pa.p._ of BURST.

BURTHEN, bur'thn, _n._ and _v.t._ For BURDEN.

BURTON, bur'ton, _n._ a tackle variously used.

BURY, ber'i, _v.t._ to hide in the ground: to cover: to place in the grave,
as a dead body: to hide or blot out of remembrance:--_pr.p._ bur'ying;
_pa.p._ bur'ied.--_ns._ BUR'YING-GROUND, BUR'YING-PLACE, ground set apart
for burying the dead: a graveyard.--BURY THE HATCHET, to cease strife.
[A.S. _byrgan_, to bury; Ger. _bergen_, to hide.]

BURY, ber'i, _n._ a delicate pear of several varieties.--Also BURR'EL,
BURR'EL-PEAR. [Cf. the Fr. _beurré_, as in '_Beurré_ d'Angoulême.']

BUS, BUSS, bus, _n._ Short for OMNIBUS.

BUSBY, bus'bi, _n._ a fur hat with short bag hanging down from the top on
its right side, of the same colour as the facings of the regiment, worn by
hussars, and, in the British army, by horse artillerymen also. [Prob.
Hung.]

BUSCON, bus'kon, _n._ (_U.S._) a miner paid by a percentage of the ore he
raises. [Sp.]

BUSH, boosh, _n._ a shrub thick with branches: anything of bushy tuft-like
shape: any wild uncultivated country, esp. at the Cape or in Australia: a
bunch of ivy hung up as a tavern sign, a tavern itself--'Good wine needs no
bush.'--_v.i._ to grow thick or bushy.--_v.t._ to set bushes about, support
with bushes: to cover seeds by means of the bush-harrow.--_n._ BUSH'-CAT,
the serval.--_adj._ BUSHED, lost in the bush.--_ns._ BUSH'-HARR'OW, a light
kind of harrow used for covering grass-seeds, formed of a barred frame
interwoven with bushes or branches; BUSH'INESS; BUSH'MAN, a settler in the
uncleared land of America or the Colonies, a woodsman: one of a native race
in South Africa (Dut. _boschjesman_); BUSH'-RANG'ER, in Australia, a
lawless fellow, often an escaped criminal, who takes to the bush and lives
by robbery; BUSH'-SHRIKE, a tropical American ant-thrush; BUSH'TIT, a small
long-tailed titmouse of West America, building a large
hanging-nest.--_v.i._ BUSH'-WHACK, to range through the bush: to fight in
guerilla warfare.--_ns_. BUSH'-WHACK'ER, a guerilla fighter: a country
lout: a short heavy scythe for cutting bushes; BUSH'-WHACK'ING, the habits
or practice of bush-whackers: the process of forcing a way for a boat by
pulling at the bushes overhanging a stream.--_adj._ BUSH'Y, full of bushes:
thick and spreading.--BEAT ABOUT THE BUSH, to go round about anything, to
evade coming to the point. [M. E. _busk_, _busch_; from a Teut. root found
in Ger. _busch_, Low L. _boscus_, Fr. _bois_.]

BUSH, boosh, _n._ the metal box or lining of any cylinder in which an axle
works.--_v.t._ to furnish with a bush.--_n._ BUSH'-MET'AL, hard brass,
gun-metal, a composition of copper and tin, used for journals, bearings,
&c. [Dut. _bus_--L. _buxus_, the box-tree.]

BUSHEL, boosh'el, _n._ a dry measure of 8 gallons, for measuring grain,
fruit, &c. [O. Fr. _boissiel_, from the root of BOX.]

BUSHEL, boosh'el, _v.t._ and _v.i._ (_U.S._) to mend or alter, as men's
clothes.--_ns._ BUSH'ELLER; BUSH'ELLING; BUSH'EL-WOM'AN.

BUSINESS, biz'nes, _n._ employment: engagment: trade, profession, or
occupation: one's concerns or affairs: a matter or affair: (_theat._)
action as distinguished from dialogue.--_adj._ BUS'INESS-LIKE, methodical,
systematic, practical.--DO THE BUSINESS FOR, to settle, make an end of: to
ruin.--GENTEEL BUSINESS (_theat._), such parts as require good
dressing.--MAKE IT ONE'S BUSINESS, to undertake to accomplish something or
see it done; MEAN BUSINESS, to be in earnest; MIND ONE'S OWN BUSINESS, to
confine one's self to one's own affairs.--SEND ABOUT ONE'S BUSINESS, to
dismiss promptly.

BUSK, busk, _v.t._ or _v.i._ to prepare: to dress one's self. [Ice. _búa_,
to prepare, and _-sk_, contr. of _sik_, the recip. pron.--_self_.]

BUSK, busk, _n._ the piece of bone, wood, or steel in the front of a
woman's stays: a corset.--_adj._ BUSKED. [Fr. _busc_, which Scheler thinks
a doublet of _bois_; Littré, the same as It. _busto_, a bust.]

BUSK, busk, _v.i._ (_naut._) to cruise along a shore, to beat about: to
seek. [Prob. Sp. _buscar_, to seek.]

BUSKET, busk'et, _n._ (_Spens._) a little bush.

[Illustration]

BUSKIN, busk'in, _n._ a kind of half-boot with high heels worn in ancient
times by actors of tragedy--hence, the tragic drama as distinguished from
comedy: a half-boot.--_adj._ BUSK'INED, dressed in buskins, noting tragedy:
tragic: dignified. [Ety. uncertain; cognates may be found in the O. Fr.
_brousequin_; Dut. _broos-ken_; Sp. _borceguí_.]

BUSKY, busk'i, _adj._ (_Shak._). Same as BOSKY.

BUSS, bus, _n._ a rude or playful kiss, a smack.--_v.t._ to kiss, esp. in a
rude or playful manner. [M. E. _bass_, prob. from Old Ger. _bussen_, to
kiss, but modified by Fr. _baiser_, to kiss, from L. _basium_, a kiss.]

BUSS, bus, _n._ a small two-masted Dutch vessel, used in the herring and
mackerel fisheries. [O. Fr. _busse_, Low L. _bussa_; cf. Ger. _büse_.]

BUSSU-PALM, bus'soo-päm, _n._ a palm growing along the Amazon, with leaves
as long as 30 feet and 5 feet broad, forming good thatch.

BUST, bust, _n._ a sculpture representing the head and breast of a person:
the upper part of the human body, a woman's bosom.--_adj._ BUST'ED,
breasted: adorned with busts. [Fr. _buste_; It. and Sp. _busto_.]

BUST, bust, _n._ and _v._ a vulgar form of Burst.--_n._ BUST'ER, something
large: a frolic: (_slang_) a roisterer.

BUSTARD, bus'tard, _n._ a genus of birds, sometimes made the type of a
large family, usually ranked in the order of marsh birds like the cranes.
[Fr. _bistard_, corr. from L. _avis tarda_, slow bird.]

BUSTLE, bus'l, _v.i._ to busy one's self noisily: to be active, often with
more noise than actual work.--_n._ hurried activity: stir: tumult.--_n._
BUST'LER. [There is a M. E. _bustelen_, of doubtful relations; perh. conn.
with _bluster_, or with Ice. _bustl_, a splash, or with A.S. _bysig_,
busy.]

BUSTLE, bus'l, _n._ a stuffed pad or cushion worn by ladies under the skirt
of their dress, the intention to improve the figure.

BUSY, biz'i, _adj._ fully employed: active: diligent: meddling.--_v.t._ to
make busy: to occupy:--_pr.p._ busying (biz'i-ing); _pa.p._ busied
(biz'id).--_adv._ BUS'ILY.--_n._ BUS'YBODY, one busy about others' affairs,
a meddling person.--_adj._ BUS'YLESS (_Shak._), without business.--_n._
BUS'YNESS, state of being busy. [A.S. _bysig_.]

BUT, but, _prep._ or _conj._ without: except: besides: only: yet:
still.--Used as a noun for a verbal objection; also as a verb, as in
Scott's '_but_ me no _buts_.'--_adj._ (_Scot._) outside, as in 'but
end.'--BUT AND BEN, a house having an outer and an inner room. [A.S.
_be-útan_, _bútan_, without--_be_, by, and _útan_, out--near and yet
outside.]

BUT, but, _n._ Same as BUTT.

BUTCHER, booch'[.e]r, _n._ one whose business is to slaughter animals for
food: one who delights in bloody deeds.--_v.t._ to slaughter animals for
food: to put to a bloody death, to kill cruelly: (_fig._) to spoil
anything, as a bad actor or the like.--_ns._ BUTCH'ER-BIRD, a shrike;
BUTCH'ERING, BUTCH'ING, the act of killing for food, or cruelly.--_adv._
BUTCH'ERLY, butcher-like, cruel, murderous.--_ns._ BUTCH'ER-MEAT,
BUTCH'ER'S-MEAT, the flesh of animals slaughtered by butchers, as
distinguished from fish, fowls, and game; BUTCH'ER'S-BROOM, a genus of
plants of the lily order, the common one being an evergreen shrub, a bunch
of which is used by butchers for sweeping their blocks; BUTCH'ERY, great or
cruel slaughter: a slaughter-house or shambles. [O. Fr. _bochier_,
_bouchier_, one who kills he-goats--_boc_, a he-goat; allied to Eng. BUCK.]

BUT-END. Same as BUTT-END.

BUTLER, but'l[.e]r, _n._ a servant who has charge of the liquors, plate,
&c.--_v.i._ to act as butler.--_ns._ BUT'LERSHIP, BUT'LERAGE; BUT'LERY, the
butler's pantry. [Norm. Fr. _butuiller_--Low L. _buticularius_. See
BOTTLE.]

BUTMENT. Same as ABUTMENT.

BUTT, but, _v.i._ and _v.t._ to strike with the head, as a goat, &c.--_n._
a push with the head of an animal.--_n._ BUTT'ER, an animal that butts. [O.
Fr. _boter_, to push, strike.]

BUTT, but, _n._ a large cask: a wine-butt = 126 gallons, a beer and sherry
butt = 108 gallons. [Cf. Fr. _botte_, Sp. _bota_, Low L. _butta_.]

BUTT, but, _n._ a mark for archery practice: a mound behind musketry or
artillery targets: one who is made the object of ridicule.--_n._
BUTT'-SHAFT (_Shak._), a shaft or arrow for shooting at butts with. [Fr.
_but_, goal.]

BUTT, but, or in longer form, BUTT'-END, _n._ the thick and heavy end: the
stump. [Ety. dub.]

BUTT, but, _n._ an ox-hide minus the _offal_ or pieces round the margins.

BUTTE, b[=u]t, but, _n._ any conspicuous and isolated hill or peak, esp. in
the Rocky Mountain region. [Fr.]

BUTTER, but'[.e]r, _n._ an oily substance obtained from cream by
churning.--_v.t._ to spread over with butter.--_ns._ BUTT'ER-BIRD, the name
in Jamaica for the rice-bunting; BUTT'ER-BOAT, a table vessel for holding
melted butter; BUTT'ER-BUMP, a bittern; BUTT'ER-BUR, -DOCK, the sweet
coltsfoot; BUTT'ERCUP, a plant of the Crowfoot genus, with a cup-like
flower of a golden yellow; BUTT'ER-FING'ERS, one who lets a cricket-ball he
ought to catch slip through his fingers; BUTT'ER-FISH (see GUNNEL);
BUTT'ERFLY, the name of an extensive group of beautiful winged insects:
(_fig._) a light-headed person.--_adj._ light, flighty, like a
butterfly.--_ns._ BUTT'ERINE, an artificial fatty compound sold as a
substitute for butter--since 1887 only allowed to be sold under the names
_margarine_ or _oleo-margarine_; BUTT'ER-MILK, the milk that remains after
the butter has been separated from the cream by churning; BUTT'ER-NUT, the
oily nut of the North American white walnut, the tree itself or its
light-coloured close-grained wood: the nut of a lofty timber-tree of
Guiana--the _souari-nut_; BUTT'ER-SCOTCH, a kind of toffee containing a
large admixture of butter; BUTT'ER-TREE, a genus of plants found in the
East Indies and in Africa, remarkable for a sweet buttery substance yielded
by their seeds when boiled; BUTT'ER-WIFE, BUTT'ER-WOM'AN, a woman who makes
and sells butter; BUTT'ER-WORT, a genus of small plants found in marshy
places, so called either from the power of the leaves to coagulate milk, or
from their peculiar sliminess.--_adj._ BUTT'ERY, like butter. [A.S.
_butere_; Ger. _butter_; both from L. _butyrum_--Gr. _boutyron_--_bous_ ox,
_tyros_, cheese.]

BUTTERY, but'[.e]r-i, _n._ a storeroom in a house for provisions, esp.
liquors.--_ns._ BUTT'ERY-BAR, the ledge for holding tankards in the
buttery; BUTT'ERY-HATCH, a half-door over which provisions are handed from
the buttery. [Fr. _bouteillerie_, lit. 'place for bottles.' See BUTLER,
BOTTLE.]

BUTTOCK, but'ok, _n._ the rump or protuberant part of the body behind: a
term in wrestling.--_ns._ BUTT'OCK-MAIL (_Scot._), the fine formerly
exacted by the Church as part of the discipline for the offence of
fornication. [Dim. of BUTT, end.]

BUTTON, but'n, _n._ a knob of metal, bone, &c., used to fasten the dress:
the knob at the end of a foil: the head of an unexpanded mushroom: the knob
of an electric bell, &c.: anything of small value, as in the phrase, 'I
don't care a button:' a person who acts as a decoy: (_pl._) young
mushrooms, sheep's dung.--_v.t._ to fasten by means of buttons: to close up
tightly.--_v.i._ to be fastened with buttons.--_ns._ BUTT'ON-BUSH, a North
American shrub of the madder family, having globular flower-heads;
BUTT'ON-HOLE, the hole or slit in the dress by which the button is
held.--_v.t._ to detain in talk, as if by taking hold of a man by the
button.--_ns._ BUTT'ON-HOOK, a hook for pulling the buttons of gloves and
shoes through the button-holes; BUTT'ON-WOOD, a small West Indian evergreen
tree of the myrobalan family: the plane-tree of the United States--also
BUTT'ON-BALL and incorrectly _Sycamore_.--_adj._ BUTT'ONY, decorated with
buttons.--BOY IN BUTTONS, a boy servant in livery, a page. [Fr. _bouton_,
any small projection, from _bouter_, to push.]

BUTTRESS, but'res, _n._ a projecting support built on to the outside of a
wall: any support or prop.--_v.t._ to prop or support, as by a buttress.
[Acc. to Dr Murray, perh. from O. Fr. _bouterez_, apparently from _bouter_,
to push, bear against.]

BUTTY, but'i, _n._ (_prov._) a chum, comrade, esp. one who takes a contract
for working out a certain area of coal, or a partner in such.--_ns._
BUTT'Y-COLL'IER; BUTT'Y-GANG.

BUTYRIC, b[=u]-tir'ik, _adj._ pertaining to or derived from butter.--_n._
B[=U]'TYL, an alcohol radical.--_adj._ BUTYR[=A]'CEOUS, buttery, containing
butter.--_n._ B[=U]'TYRATE, a salt of butyric acid.--BUTYRIC ACID, a
volatile fatty acid possessing the disagreeable odour of rancid butter. [L.
_butyrum_.]

BUXOM, buks'um, _adj._ yielding, elastic: gay, lively, jolly.--_n._
BUX'OMNESS, the quality of being buxom: liveliness: gaiety. [M. E.
_buhsum_, pliable, obedient--A.S. _búgan_, to bow, yield, and affix SOME.]

BUY, b[=i], _v.t._ to purchase for money: to bribe: to obtain in exchange
for something:--_pr.p._ buy'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ bought (bawt).--_adj._
BUY'ABLE, capable of being bought.--_n._ BUY'ER, one who buys, a
purchaser.--BUY AND SELL (_Shak._), to barter; BUY IN, to purchase a stock:
to buy back for the owner at an auction; BUY OFF, or OUT, to gain release
from military service by payment of money; BUY OVER, to gain by bribery;
BUY UP, to purchase the whole stock. [A.S. _bycgan_; Goth. _bugjan_.]

BUZZ, buz, _v.i._ to make a humming noise like bees.--_v.t._ to whisper or
spread secretly.--_n._ the noise of bees and flies: a humming sound: a
whispered report.--_n._ BUZZ'ER, one who buzzes: (_Shak._) a whisperer or
tell-tale.--_adv._ BUZZ'INGLY.--_adj._ BUZZ'Y. [From the sound.]

BUZZ, buz, _v.t._ to drink to the bottom.

BUZZARD, buz'ard, _n._ a bird of prey of the falcon family: a blockhead: a
name for some night moths and cockchafers.--_n._ BUZZ'ARD-CLOCK, a
cockchafer, the dor. [Fr. _busard_; prob. from L. _buteo_, a kind of
falcon.]

BY, b[=i], _prep._ at the side of: near to: through, denoting the agent,
cause, means, &c.--_adv._ near: passing near: in presence of: aside,
away.--_adv._ BY'-AND-BY, soon, presently.--_ns._ BY'-BLOW, a side blow: an
illegitimate child; BY'-COR'NER, an out-of-the-way place; BY'-DRINK'ING
(_Shak._), drinking between meals; BY'-ELEC'TION, a parliamentary election
during the sitting of parliament: BY'-END, a subsidiary aim; BY'-FORM, a
form of a word slightly varying from it; BY'-G[=O]'ING, the action of
passing by, esp. IN THE BY-GOING.--_adj._ BY'GONE.--_ns._ BY'-LANE, a side
lane or passage out of the common road; BY'-M[=O]'TIVE, an unavowed motive;
BY'NAME, a nickname; BY'-PASS'AGE, a side passage.--_adj._ BY'-PAST
(_Shak._), past: gone by.--_ns._ BY'PATH, a side path; BY'-PLACE, a retired
place; BY'PLAY, a scene carried on, subordinate to and apart from the main
part of the play; BY'-PR[=O]'DUCT, an accessory product resulting from some
specific process or manufacture; BY'ROAD, a retired side road; BY'ROOM
(_Shak._), a side or private room; BY'-SPEECH, a casual speech; BY'STANDER,
one who stands by or near one--hence a looker-on; BY'-STREET, an obscure
street; BY'-THING, a thing of minor importance; BY'-TIME, leisure time;
BY'WAY, a private and obscure way; BY'WORD, a common saying: a proverb: an
object of common derision; BY'WORK, work for leisure hours.--BY-THE-BY, BY
THE WAY, in passing.--LET BYGONES BE BYGONES, let the past alone. [A.S.
_bi_, _big_; Ger. _bei_, L. _ambi_.]

BY, BYE, b[=i], _n._ anything of minor importance, a side issue, a thing
not directly aimed at: the condition of being odd, as opposed to _even_,
the state of being left without a competitor, as in tennis, &c.: in
cricket, a run stolen by the batsman on the ball passing the wicket-keeper
and long-stop, the batsman not having struck the ball.--BY-THE-BYE, or -BY,
incidentally, by the way.

BYCOCKET, b[=i]'kok-et, _n._ a turned-up peaked cap worn by noble persons
in the 15th century--sometimes erroneously _abacot_. [O. Fr. _bicoquet_,
prob. _bi-_ (L. _bis_), double, _coque_, a shell.]

BYDE, b[=i]d, _v.i._ Same as BIDE.

BYLANDER, obsolete form of BILANDER.

BYLAW, BYE-LAW, b[=i]'-law, _n._ the law of a city, town, or private
corporation: a supplementary law or regulation. [The same as BYRLAW, from
Ice. _byarlög_, Dan. _by-lov_, town-law; Scot. _bir-law_; from Ice. _bua_,
to dwell. See BOWER. _By_, town, is the suffix in many place-names. The
_by_ in bylaw is generally confused with the preposition.]

BYNEMPT, b[=i]-nempt', _pa.t._ of obsolete verb _Bename_ (_Spens._), named.
[A.S. pfx. _by-_, _be-_, and _nemnen_, to name. See NAME.]

BYOUS, b[=i]'us, _adj._ (_Scot._) extraordinary.--_adv._ BY'OUSLY.

BYRE, b[=i]r, _n._ (_Scot._) a cow-house. [A.S. _býre_ _pl._
dwellings--_búr_, a bower. See BOWER.]

BYRLADY, bir-l[=a]'di, contraction for _By our Lady_.

BYRLAW, bir'law, _n._ a sort of popular jurisprudence formerly in use in
Scotland, in villages and among husbandmen, concerning neighbourhood to be
kept among themselves.--_n._ BYR'LAW-MAN, still in parts of Scotland, an
arbiter, oddsman, or umpire. [A.S. _burh_, a borough.]

BYRONIC, b[=i]-ron'ik, _adj._ possessing the characteristics of Lord
_Byron_ (1788-1824), or of his poetry, overstrained in sentiment or
passion, cynical and libertine.--_adv._ BYRON'ICALLY.--_n._ BY'RONISM.

BYSSOLITE, bis'o-l[=i]t, _n._ an olive-green variety of actinolite, in long
crystals.--Also AMIAN'TUS. [Gr. _byssos_, byssus, _lithos_, stone.]

BYSSUS, bis'us, _n._ a fine yellowish flax, and the linen made from it: the
bundle of fine silky filaments by which many shellfish attach themselves to
rocks, &c.: a genus of cryptogamic plants of a silky fibrous texture found
on decaying wood, in mines, &c., and other dark places.--_adjs._
BYSSIF'EROUS, bearing or having a byssus; BYSS'INE, made of fine linen.
[L.--Gr. _byssos_, a fine flaxen or silky substance.]

BYZANT, biz'ant. Same as BEZANT.

BYZANTINE, biz-an't[=i]n, biz'-, _adj._ relating to _Byzantium_ or
Constantinople.--_n._ an inhabitant thereof.--_n._ BYZAN'TINISM, the
manifestation of Byzantine characteristics.--BYZANTINE ARCHITECTURE, the
style prevalent in the Eastern Empire down to 1453, marked by the round
arch springing from columns or piers, the dome supported upon pendentives,
capitals elaborately sculptured, mosaic or other incrustations, &c.;
BYZANTINE CHURCH, the Eastern or Greek Church; BYZANTINE EMPIRE, the
Eastern or Greek Empire from 395 A.D. to 1453; BYZANTINE HISTORIANS, the
series of Greek chroniclers of the affairs of the Byzantine Empire down to
its fall in 1453.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

the third letter of our alphabet, originally having the sound of _g_, then
of _k_, and finally, in some languages, equivalent to _s_: (_mus._) name of
one of the notes of the gamut, also the sound on which the system is
founded--the scale C major has neither flats nor sharps, and therefore is
called the _natural scale_.

CAABA, kä'a-ba, _n._ the Moslem Holy of Holies, a square building at Mecca,
containing the famous Black Stone built into the south-east corner at a
height convenient for being kissed. [Ar.]

CAAING-WHALE, kä'ing-hw[=a]l, _n._ one of the Cetacea, in the dolphin
family, very gregarious, and oftener stranded than any other 'whale'--16 to
24 feet long, and 10 feet in girth. Other names are _Pilot-whale_,
_Black-fish_, _Social Whale_, _Grindhval_. [Scot. _ca_, to drive.]

CAB, kab, _n._ a public carriage of various sizes and shapes, with two or
four wheels, drawn by one horse.--_ns._ CAB'BY, a shortened form of
CAB'MAN, one who drives a cab for hire; CAB'-STAND, a place where cabs
stand for hire; CAB'-TOUT, one whose business it is to call cabs.--CABMEN'S
SHELTER, a place of shelter for cabmen while waiting for hire. [Shortened
from CABRIOLET.]

CAB, kab, _n._ a Hebrew dry measure = nearly three pints. [Heb.
_kab_--_kabab_, to hollow.]

CABAL, ka-bal', _n._ a small party united for some secret design: the plot
itself: a name in English history esp. given to five unpopular ministers of
Charles II. (1672), whose initials happened to make up the word.--_v.i._ to
form a party for a secret purpose: to plot:--_pr.p._ cabal'ling.--_n._
CABAL'LER, a plotter or intriguer. [Fr. _cabale_; from CABALA.]

CABALLERO, kä-bä-ly[=a]'r[=o], _n._ a Spanish gentleman: a Spanish dance.

CABALLINE, kab'a-lin, _adj._ pertaining to, or suited to, a horse. [L.
_caballinus_--_caballus_, a horse.]

CABARET, kab'a-ret, _n._ a small tavern. [Fr., prob. for
_cabanaret_--_cabane_, a hut.]

CABAS, CABA, kab'a, _n._ a woman's work-basket or reticule: a rush basket
or pannier. [Fr.]

CABBAGE, kab'[=a]j, _n._ a well-known kitchen vegetable.--_ns._
CABB'AGE-BUTT'ERFLY, a large butterfly whose larvæ injure the leaves of
cabbage and other cruciferous plants; CABB'AGE-MOTH, a moth whose larva
feeds on the cabbage; CABB'AGE-PALM, CABB'AGE-TREE, a name given in
different countries to different species of palm, the great terminal bud of
which is eaten cooked like cabbage, or sometimes also raw in salads;
CABB'AGE-ROSE, a species of rose which has a thick form like a
cabbage-head; CABB'AGE-WORM, the larva of the cabbage-butterfly or of the
cabbage-moth. [Fr. _caboche_, head (_choux cabus_, a cabbage); from L.
_caput_, the head.]

CABBAGE, kab'[=a]j, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to purloin, esp. a tailor of portions
of a customer's cloth.--_n._ cloth so appropriated.

CABBALA, CABALA, kab'a-la, _n._ a secret science of the Jewish rabbis for
the interpretation of the hidden sense of Scripture, claimed to be handed
down by oral tradition.--_ns._ CABB'ALISM, the science of the cabbala;
CABB'ALIST, one versed in the cabbala.--_adjs._ CABBALIST'IC, -AL, relating
to the cabbala: having a hidden meaning. [Heb. _qabb[=a]l[=a]h_, tradition,
_qibb[=e]l_, to receive.]

CABER, k[=a]b'[.e]r, _n._ a pole, generally the stem of a young tree, which
is poised and tossed or hurled by Highland athletes. [Gael.]

CABIN, kab'in, _n._ a hut or cottage: a small room, esp. in a ship, for
officers or passengers--hence CAB'IN-PASS'ENGER, one paying for superior
accommodation.--_v.t._ to shut up in a cabin.--_v.i._ to dwell in a
cabin.--_n._ CAB'IN-BOY, a boy who waits on the officers or those who live
in the cabin of a ship. [Fr. _cabane_--Low L. _capanna_.]

CABINET, kab'in-et, _n._ (_obs._) a little cabin or hut: (_Shak._) the bed
or nest of a beast or bird: a small room, closet, or private apartment: a
case of drawers for articles of value: a private room for consultation,
esp. a king's--hence THE CABINET, a limited number of the chief ministers
who govern England, being the leaders of the majority in parliament.--_ns._
CAB'INET-COUN'CIL, a council or consultation of the members of the Cabinet;
CAB'INET-EDI'TION (of a book), one less in size and price than a library
edition, but still elegant in format; CAB'INET-MAK'ER, a maker of cabinets
and other fine furniture; CAB'INET-PH[=O]'TOGRAPH, one of the size larger
than a carte-de-visite. [Dim. of CABIN; cf. mod. Fr. _cabinet_.]

CABIRI, ka-b[=i]'r[=i], _n.pl._ ancient divinities of Semitic origin,
associated with fire and creative energy, worshipped in mysteries in
Lemnos, Samothrace, and Indros--also CABEI'RI.--_adjs._ CABIR'IAN,
CABIR'IC.

CABLE, k[=a]'bl, _n._ a strong rope or chain which ties anything, esp. a
ship to her anchor: a nautical measure of 100 fathoms; a cable for
submarine telegraphs composed of wires embedded in gutta-percha and encased
in coiled strands of iron wire; a bundle of insulated wires laid
underground in a street: a cable-message.--_v.t._ to provide with a cable,
to tie up: to transmit a message, or to communicate with any one by
submarine telegram.--_ns._ C[=A]'BLEGRAM, a message sent by submarine
telegraph cable; C[=A]'BLE-MOULD'ING, a bead or moulding carved in
imitation of a thick rope; C[=A]'BLING, a bead or moulding like a thick
rope, often worked in flutes: the filling of flutes with a moulding like a
cable.--SLIP THE CABLE, to let it run out. [Fr.--Low L. _caplum_, a
halter--_cap-[)e]re_, to hold.]

CABOB, ka-bob', _n._ an Oriental dish of pieces of meat roasted with herbs:
roast meat generally in India. [Ar. _kab[=a]b_.]

CABOCHED, CABOSHED, ka-bosht', _adj._ (_her._) bearing the head of an
animal, with only the face seen. [Fr. _caboché_--L. _caput_, head.]

CABOCHON, ka-b[=o]-shong, _n._ a precious stone polished but uncut.--EN
CABOCHON, rounded on top and flat on back, without facets--garnets,
moonstone, &c. [Fr.]

CABOODLE, ka-b[=oo]'dl, _n._ (_slang_) crowd, company.

CABOOSE, ka-b[=oo]s', _n._ the kitchen or cooking-stove of a ship. [Dut.
_kombuis_; cf. Ger. _kabuse_.]

CABRIOLE. See CAPRIOLE.

CABRIOLET, kab-ri-[=o]-l[=a]', _n._ a covered carriage with two or four
wheels drawn by one horse. [Fr. See CAPRIOLE. By 1830 shortened into CAB.]

CACAO, ka-k[=a]'o, ka-kä'o, _n._ the chocolate-tree, from the seeds of
which chocolate is made. [Mex. _cacauatl_.]

CACHÆMIA, CACHEMIA, ka-k[=e]'mi-a, _n._ a morbid state of the
blood.--_adj._ CACH[=E]'MIC. [Gr. _kakos_, bad, _haima_, blood.]

CACHALOT, kash'a-lot, _n._ the sperm-whale. [Fr.]

CACHE, kash, _n._ a hiding-place for treasure, for stores of provisions,
ammunition, &c.: the stores themselves so hidden.--_v.t._ to hide
anything.--_n._ CACHE'POT, an ornamental flower-pot enclosing a common one
of earthenware. [Fr. _cacher_, to hide.]

CACHET, kash'[=a], _n._ a seal, any distinctive stamp.--LETTRE DE CACHET, a
letter under the private seal of the king of France under the old régime,
by which the royal pleasure was made known to individuals, and the
administration of justice often interfered with. [Fr.]

CACHEXY, ka-kek'si, _n._ a bad state of body: a depraved habit of
mind.--_adjs._ CACHEC'TIC, -AL. [L.--Gr. _kachexia_--_kakos_, bad, _hexis_,
condition.]

CACHINNATION, kak-in-[=a]'shun, _n._ loud laughter.--_adj._ CACHIN'NATORY.
[L. _cachinnation-em_, _cachinn[=a]re_, to laugh loudly--from the sound.]

CACHOLONG, kash'o-long, _n._ a variety of quartz or of opal, generally of a
milky colour. [Fr.]

CACHOLOT. Same as CACHALOT.

CACHOU, kash'[=oo], _n._ a sweetmeat, made in the form of a pill, of
extract of liquorice, cashew-nut, or the like, used by some smokers in the
hope to sweeten their breath. [Fr.]

CACHUCHA, kach'[=oo]ch-a, _n._ a lively Spanish dance. [Sp.]

CACIQUE, ka-s[=e]k', _n._ a native chief among the West Indian aborigines.
[Haytian.]

CACKLE, kak'l, _n._ the sound made by a hen or goose.--_v.i._ to make such
a sound.--_ns._ CACK'LER, a fowl that cackles: a talkative, gossiping
person; CACK'LING, noise of a goose or hen. [M. E. _cakelen_; cog. with
Dut. _hakelen_.]

CACODEMON, kak-o-d[=e]'mon, _n._ an evil spirit: (_Shak._) a nightmare.
[Gr. _kakos_, bad, and DEMON.]

CACODYL, kak'o-dil, _n._ a colourless stinking liquid, composed of arsenic,
carbon, and hydrogen. [Gr. _kak[=o]d[=e]s_, ill-smelling.]

CACOETHES, kak-o-[=e]'th[=e]z, _n._ an obstinate habit or disposition. [Gr.
_kakos_, bad, _[=e]thos_, habit.]

CACOGASTRIC, kak-[=o]-gas'trik, _adj._ pertaining to a disordered stomach,
dyspeptic. [Gr. _kakos_, bad, _gast[=e]r_, the stomach.]

CACOGRAPHY, kak-og'ra-fi, _n._ bad writing or spelling.--_adj._
CACOGRAPH'IC [Gr. _kakos_, bad, and _graphia_, writing.]

CACOLET, kak'o-l[=a], _n._ a military mule-litter for sick and wounded.
[Fr.; prob. Basque.]

CACOLOGY, ka-kol'o-ji, _n._ bad grammar or pronunciation. [Gr. _kakos_,
bad, _logos_, speech.]

CACOON, ka-k[=oo]n', _n._ a large seed of a tropical climber of the bean
family, used for making scent-bottles, snuff boxes, purses, &c.: a
purgative and emetic seed of a tropical American climber of the gourd
family.

CACOPHONY, ka-kof'[=o]-ni, _n._ a disagreeable sound: discord of
sounds.--_adjs._ CACOPH'ONOUS, CACOPHON'IC, -AL, CACOPH[=O]'NIOUS,
harsh-sounding. [Gr. _kakos_, bad, _ph[=o]n[=e]_, sound.]

CACTUS, kak'tus, _n._ an American plant, generally with prickles instead of
leaves.--_adj._ CACT[=A]'CEOUS, pertaining to or like the cactus. [Gr., a
prickly plant found in Sicily.]

CAD, kad, _n._ a low, mean, or vulgar fellow: a bus driver or conductor, a
tavern-yard loafer.--_adj._ CAD'DISH. [Short for CADET.]

CADASTRAL, ka-das'tral, _adj._ pertaining to a CADASTRE or public register
of the lands of a country for fiscal purposes: applied also to a survey on
a large scale, like our Ordnance Survey on the scale of 25 inches to the
mile. [Fr.--Low L. _capitastrum_, register for a poll-tax--L. _caput_, the
head.]

CADAVEROUS, ka-dav'[.e]-rus, _adj._ looking like a dead body:
sickly-looking.--_n._ CAD[=A]V'ER (_surg._ and _anat._), a corpse.--_adj._
CADAV'ERIC.--_n._ CADAV'EROUSNESS. [L. _cadaver_, a dead
body--_cad-[)e]re_, to fall dead.]

CADDICE, CADDIS, kad'dis, _n._ the larva of the May-fly and other species
of Phryganea, which lives in water in a sheath formed of fragments of wood,
stone, shell, leaves, &c., open at both ends--caddis-worms form excellent
bait for trout.--_n._ CAD'DIS-FLY.

CADDIE, kad'i, _n._ a lad who attends a golfer at play, carrying his clubs:
in 18th century a messenger or errand porter in Edinburgh. [See CADET.]

CADDIS, kad'dis, _n._ (_Shak._) worsted ribbon. [O. Fr. _cadaz_, _cadas_.]

CADDY, kad'i, _n._ a small box for holding tea. [Malay _kati_, the weight
of the small packets in which tea is made up.]

CADE, k[=a]d, _n._ a barrel or cask. [Fr.--L. _cadus_, a cask.]

CADE, k[=a]d, _n._ and _adj._ a lamb or colt brought up by hand, a pet
lamb. [Ety. unknown.]

CADEAU, kad'o, _n._ a present. [Fr.]

CADENAS, kad'e-nas, _n._ in medieval times, a locked casket containing a
great man's table requisites, knife, fork, spoon, &c., often in the form of
a ship. [O. Fr.,--L. _catena_, a chain.]

CADENCE, k[=a]'dens, _n._ the fall of the voice at the end of a sentence:
tone, sound, modulation.--_adj._ C[=A]'DENCED, rhythmical.--_n._
C[=A]'DENCY, regularity of movement: (_her._) the relative status of
younger sons.--_adj._ C[=A]'DENT (_Shak._), falling.--_n._ CADEN'ZA, a
flourish given by a solo voice or instrument at the close of a movement.
[Fr.--L. _cad-[)e]re_, to fall.]

CADET, ka-det', _n._ the younger or youngest son: a member of the younger
branch of a family: in the army, one who serves as a private to become an
officer: a student in a military school.--_n._ CADET'SHIP.--CADET CORPS,
parties of boys undergoing military training. [Fr. _cadet_, formerly
_capdet_--Low L. _capitettum_, dim. of _caput_, the head.]

CADGE, kaj, _v.i._ to beg or go about begging.--_n._ CADG'ER, a carrier who
collects country produce, a hawker: a fellow who picks up his living about
the streets. [Prob. conn. with CATCH.]

CADGY, kaj'i, _adj._ (_prov._) frolicsome: wanton. [Cf. Dan. _kaad_,
wanton, Ice. _kátr_, merry.]

CADI, k[=a]'di, _n._ a judge in Mohammedan countries. [Ar. _q[=a]d[=i]_, a
judge.]

CADMEAN, kad-m[=e]'an, _adj._ relating to _Cadmus_, who introduced the
original Greek alphabet.

CADMIA, kad'mi-a, _n._ oxide of zinc, containing from 10 to 20 per cent. of
cadmium. [Gr. _kadmia_, _kadmeia_ (_ge_), Cadmean (earth), calamine.]

CADMIUM, kad'mi-um, _n._ a white metal occurring in zinc ores. [See
CADMIA.]

CADRANS, kad'rans, _n._ a wooden instrument by which a gem is adjusted
while being cut. [Fr. _cadran_, a quadrant.]

CADRE, kad'r, _n._ a nucleus, framework, esp. the permanent skeleton of a
regiment or corps, the commissioned and non-commissioned officers, &c.,
around whom the rank and file may be quickly grouped. [Fr.]

[Illustration]

CADUCEUS, ka-d[=u]'se-us, _n._ (_myth._) the rod carried by Mercury, the
messenger of the gods--a wand surmounted with two wings and entwined by two
serpents.--_adj._ CAD[=U]'CEAN. [L., akin to Gr. _k[=e]rukeion_, a herald's
wand--_k[=e]rux_, a herald.]

CADUCIBRANCHIATE, ka-d[=u]i-si-brang'ki-[=a]t, _adj._ losing the gills on
attaining maturity, as all the salamanders.--_n.pl._ CADUCIBRANCHI[=A]'TA.
[L. _caducus_, caducous, _branchiæ_, gills.]

CADUCOUS, ka-d[=u]'kus, _adj._ falling early, as leaves or flowers.--_n._
CAD[=U]'CITY, transitoriness, senility. [L. _caducus_--_cad-[)e]re_, to
fall.]

CÆCUM, s[=e]'kum, _n._ a blind sac: a sac or bag having only one opening,
connected with the intestine of an animal.--_adj._ CÆ'CAL. [L.--_cæcus_,
blind.]

CAEN-STONE, k[=a]'en-st[=o]n, _n._ a cream-coloured limestone brought from
_Caen_ in France.

CÆSAR, s[=e]'zar, _n._ an absolute monarch, an autocrat, from the Roman
dictator Caius Julius Cæsar (100-44 B.C.).--_adj._ CÆSAR'EAN, relating to
Julius Cæsar.--_ns._ CÆ'SARISM; CÆ'SARIST; CÆ'SARSHIP.--CÆSAREAN OPERATION,
the popular name for Hysterotomy, the delivery of a child by cutting
through the walls of the abdomen, as is said to have been the case with
Cæsar.

CÆSIUM, s[=e]z'i-um, _n._ a silver-white, soft, and extensile alkaline
metal, almost always found along with rubidium, discovered by Bunsen and
Kirchhoff in 1860 by spectrum analysis.--_adj._ CÆS'IOUS, bluish green. [L.
_cæsius_, bluish gray.]

CÆSURA, CESURA, s[=e]-z[=u]'ra, _n._ a syllable cut off at the end of a
word after the completion of a foot: a pause in a verse.--_adj._
CÆS[=U]'RAL. [L.--_cæd[)e]re_, _cæsum_, to cut off.]

CAFÉ, käf'[=a], _n._ a coffee-house, a restaurant.--CAFÉ CHANTANT, a public
place of entertainment where the guests hear music while sipping their
liquor. [Fr.]

CAFFEINE, kaf'e-in, or kaf-[=e]'in, _n._ the alkaloid or active principle
of coffee and tea. [Fr. _caféine_. See COFFEE.]

CAFFRE, kaf'f[.e]r, _n._ more correctly KAFIR (q.v.).

CAFTAN, kaf'tan, _n._ a Persian or Turkish vest. [Turk. _qaftán_.]

CAGE, k[=a]j, _n._ a place of confinement: a box made of wire and wood for
holding birds or small animals: (_mining_) a frame with one or more
platforms for cars, used in hoisting in a vertical shaft: the framework
supporting a peal of bells.--_v.t._ to imprison in a cage--_p.adj._ CAGED,
confined.--_ns._ CAGE'LING, a bird kept in a cage; CAGE'-WORK, open work
like the bars of a cage. [Fr.--L. _cavea_, a hollow place.]

CAGOT, kag'[=o], _n._ one of an outcast race found scattered in the
district of the western Pyrenees, most likely the descendants of lepers.
[Fr.; origin unknown.]

CAHIER, ka-y[=a]', _n._ a writing-book, memorandum or report: a memorial.
[Fr.]

CAHOOT, ka-h[=oo]t', _n._ (_U.S._) company or partnership.

CAILLACH, k[=i]l'yah, _n._ an old woman. [Gael. _cailleach_.]

CAIMAC, CAIMACAM. See KAIMAKAM.

CAIMAN. Same as CAYMAN.

CAIN, k[=a]n, _n._ a murderer, from _Cain_, who killed his brother Abel
(Gen. iv.).--_adj._ CAIN'-COL'OURED (_Shak._), reddish, the traditional
colour of the hair of Cain and Judas.--_n._ CAIN'ITE, a descendant of Cain:
a member of a 2d-century set of Gnostics who revered Cain and Judas.

CAIN, KAIN, k[=a]n, _n._ in old Scots law, rent paid in kind, esp. in
poultry, &c.--TO PAY THE CAIN, to pay the penalty. [Ir. and Gael, _cáin_,
rent, tax.]

CAINOZOIC, k[=a]-no-z[=o]'ik, _adj._ belonging to the third of the great
periods of geology, the same as the Tertiary (q.v.). [Gr. _kainos_, newly
made, recent, _z[=o]on_, animal.]

CAIQUE, kä-[=e]k', _n._ a light skiff used on the Bosporus: the skiff of a
galley. [Fr.,--Turk. _kaik_, a boat.]

CAIRD, k[=a]rd, _n._ a tramping tinker, a gipsy, a vagrant. [Gael. and Ir.
_ceard_.]

CAIRN, k[=a]rn, _n._ a heap of stones, esp. one raised over a grave, or as
a landmark on a mountain-top.--_n._ CAIRN'GORM-STONE, or simply CAIRNGORM,
a name often given by jewellers to brown or yellow quartz or rock-crystal,
because found among the Cairngorm Mountains in Aberdeenshire. [Celt.
_carn_.]

CAISSON, k[=a]s'on, _n._ a tumbril or ammunition wagon: a chest filled with
explosive materials: a strong case for keeping out the water while the
foundations of a bridge are being built: an apparatus for lifting a vessel
out of the water for repairs or inspection: the pontoon or floating gate
used to close a dry-dock. [Fr., from _caisse_, a case or chest. See CASE.]

CAITIFF, k[=a]'tif, _n._ a mean despicable fellow.--_adj._ mean,
base.--_n._ CAI'TIVE (_Spens._), captive, subject. [O. Fr. _caitif_, (Fr.
_chétif_)--L. _captivus_, a captive--_cap-[)e]re_, to take.]

CAJOLE, ka-j[=o]l', _v.t._ to coax: to cheat by flattery.--_ns._
CAJOLE'MENT, coaxing for the purpose of deluding: wheedling language:
flattery; CAJOL'ER; CAJOL'ERY. [Fr. _cajoler_, to chatter; ety. dub.]

CAJUPUT, kaj'i-put, _n._ a pungent, volatile, aromatic oil, distilled from
the leaves of two trees native to Australia.--Also CAJ'EPUT. [Malay.]

CAKE, k[=a]k, _n._ a piece of dough that is baked: a small loaf of fine
bread: any flattened mass baked, as _pan_-_cake_, &c., or as soap, wax,
tobacco, &c.: a thin hard-baked kind of oaten-bread--whence Scotland is
styled the 'Land of Cakes:' fancy bread, sweetened: a composition of bread
with butter, sugar, spices, currants, raisins, &c., baked into any
form--_plum-cake_, _tea-cake_, _wedding-cake_.--_v.t._ to form into a cake
or hard mass.--_v.i._ to become baked or hardened.--_adj._ CAK'Y.--CAKES
AND ALE, a phrase covering vaguely all the good things of life.--TO TAKE
THE CAKE (_slang_), to carry off the honours, rank first. [Scand. _kaka_;
cog. with Ger. _kuche_, Dut. _koek_.]

CALABAR-BEAN, käl'a-bär-b[=e]n, _n._ the seed of _Physostigma venenosum_,
the ordeal bean of Old Calabar, used in the form of an emulsion in cases of
witchcraft, the accused being plainly innocent if he can throw off the
poison by vomiting.

CALABASH, kal'a-bash, _n._ a tree of tropical America, bearing a large
melon-like fruit, the shell of which, called a calabash, is used for
domestic purposes, as holding liquids, &c. [Fr. _calebasse_--Sp.
_calabaza_--Pers. _kharbuz_, melon.]

CALABOOSE, kal'a-b[=oo]s, _n._ a prison in New Orleans, esp. a common
lock-up. [Sp. _calabozo_, a dungeon.]

CALADIUM, kal-[=a]'di-um, _n._ a genus of plants of the Arum family, with
edible starchy root-stocks. [Latinised from Malay _kél[=a]dy_.]

CALAMANCO, kal-a-mangk'o, _n._ a satin-twilled woollen stuff, checkered or
brocaded in the warp. [Dut. _kalamink_, Ger. _kalmank_, Fr. _calmande_;
origin unknown.]

CALAMANDER, kal'a-man-d[.e]r, _n._ a hard and valuable cabinet-wood of a
brownish colour, with black stripes, brought from India and Ceylon. [Prob.
Singh.]

CALAMARY, kal'a-mar-i, _n._ a popular name applied to numerous forms of
cuttle-fish or Cephalopoda, more esp. to _Loligo vulgaris_.--Also SQUID.
[Sp. _calamar_--Fr. _calmar_--L. _calamarius_, _calamus_, a pen.]

CALAMINE, kal'a-m[=i]n, _n._ an ore consisting essentially of carbonate of
zinc. [Fr.--Low L. _calamina_, most prob. from L. _cadmia_.]

CALAMINT, kal'a-mint, _n._ a genus of Labiate plants closely allied to balm
and thyme. [Fr.--Low L. _calamentum_, through L. from Gr. _kalaminth[=e]_.]

CALAMITE, kal'a-m[=i]t, _n._ a fossil plant abundant in the coal-measures,
believed to be a kind of gigantic horse-tails (_Equisetaceæ_). [Formed from
L. _calamus_, a reed.]

CALAMITY, kal-am'i-ti, _n._ a great misfortune: affliction.--_adj._
CALAM'ITOUS, making wretched, disastrous.--_adv._ CALAM'ITOUSLY, in a
calamitous manner.--_n._ CALAM'ITOUSNESS, the quality of producing
distress: distress: misery. [Fr. _calamité_--L. _calamitat-em_.]

CALAMUS, kal'a-mus, _n._ the traditional name of the sweet flag, which is
no doubt the _Calamus aromaticus_ of Roman authors, and probably the sweet
calamus and sweet cane of Scripture, but not the fragrant lemon-grass of
India: a genus of palms whose stems make canes or rattans: the reed pen
used by the ancients in writing. [L.--Gr.]

CALASH, ka-lash', _n._ a light low-wheeled carriage with a folding top: a
silk and whalebone hood worn by ladies to shade the face. [Fr. _calèche_;
of Slav. origin, as Bohem. _kolésa_, Russ. _koleso_, a wheel.]

CALAVANCE, kal'a-vans, _n._ a name for certain varieties of pulse.--Also
CAR'AVANCE. [Sp. _garbanzo_, chickpea, said to be the Basque _garbantzu_.]

CALCANEUM, kal-k[=a]'n[=e]-um, _n._ a bone of the tarsus or ankle, forming
in man the prominence of the heel, the _os calcis_: in birds, the
hypotarsus.--_adjs._ CALC[=A]'NEAL, CALC[=A]'NEAN. [L., the heel--_calx_,
the heel.]

CALCAR, kal'kar, _n._ (_bot._) a spur or spur-like projection, esp. from
the base of a petal: (_anat._) an eminence in the lateral ventricles of the
brain, the hippocampus minor or calcar avis.--_adjs._ CAL'CARATE;
CALCAR'IFORM; CAL'CARINE. [L., a spur--_calx_, _calcis_, the heel.]

CALCAR, kal'kar, _n._ an oven or furnace for calcining the materials of
frit before melting--also _Fritting-furnace_: an arch or oven for
annealing.

CALCAREOUS, kal-k[=a]'re-us, _adj._ like or containing chalk or lime,
whether waters, rocks, or soils.--_n._ CALC[=A]'REOUSNESS.--_adj._
CALCARIF'EROUS, better CALCIF'EROUS, containing lime. [L. _calcarius_, from
_calx_, lime.]

CALCEAMENTUM, kal-s[=e]-a-men'tum, _n._ a red silk embroidered sandal
forming part of the insignia of the Holy Roman Empire. [L.]

CALCED, kalst, _adj._ shod, wearing shoes--opp. to _Discalced_--of
Carmelites.--_v.t._ CAL'C[=E]ATE, to shoe.--_adjs._ CAL'C[=E]ATE, -D, shod;
CAL'C[=E]IFORM (_bot._), having the form of a slipper; CAL'C[=E]OLATE,
calceiform. [Low L. _calceus_, a shoe--_calx_, _calcis_, the heel.]

CALCEOLARIA, kal-se-o-l[=a]'ri-a, _n._ a South American genus of
_Scrophulariaceæ_, largely cultivated as half-hardy or greenhouse plants
for the beauty and variety in colour of the two-lipped slipper-like
flowers. [L. _calceolus_, dim. of _calceus_, a shoe.]

CALCIUM, kal'si-um, _n._ the metal present in chalk, stucco, and other
compounds of lime.--_adjs._ CAL'CIC, containing calcium; CAL'CIFIC,
calcifying or calcified.--_v.i._ CAL'CIFIC[=A]'TION, the process of
calcifying, a changing into lime.--_adjs._ CAL'CIFORM, like chalk, pebbly;
CALCIF'UGOUS, avoiding limestone.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ CAL'CIFY, to make
calcic: to turn into bony tissue.--_adjs._ CALCIG'ENOUS, forming lime;
CALCIG'EROUS, containing lime.--_n._ CAL'CIMINE, a white or tinted wash for
ceilings, walls, &c., consisting of whiting, with glue, &c.--_v.t._ to wash
with such.--_adj._ CAL'CINABLE, capable of being calcined.--_n._
CALCIN[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ CAL'CINE, or CALCINE', to reduce to a calx or
chalky powder by the action of heat, to burn to ashes.--_v.i._ to become a
calx or powder by heat.--_ns._ CAL'CITE, native calcium carbonate, or
carbonate of lime--also called CALC[=A]'REOUS SPAR and CALC'SPAR;
CALC'-SIN'TER, CALC'-TUFF, TRA'VERTIN, a porous deposit from springs or
rivers which in flowing through limestone rocks have become charged with
calcium carbonate. [Formed from L. _calx_, chalk.]

CALCOGRAPHY. See CHALCOGRAPHY.

CALCULATE, kal'k[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to count or reckon: to think out: to
adapt, fit (only passive, with _for_): (_U.S._) to think, purpose.--_v.i._
to make a calculation: to estimate.--_adjs._ CAL'CULABLE; CAL'CULATING,
given to forethought, deliberately selfish and scheming.--_n._
CALCUL[=A]'TION, the art or process of calculating: estimate:
forecast.--_adj._ CAL'CUL[=A]TIVE, relating to calculation.--_n._
CAL'CUL[=A]TOR, one who calculates. [L. _calcul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to
reckon by help of little stones--_calculus_, dim. of _calx_, a little
stone.]

CALCULUS, kal'k[=u]-lus, _n._ a stone-like concretion which forms in
certain parts of the body: one of the higher branches of
mathematics:--_pl._ CALCULI (kal'k[=u]-li).--_adj._ CAL'CULOSE, stony or
like stone: gritty: affected with stone or with gravel.--CALCULUS OF FINITE
DIFFERENCES not merely does not consider differentials, but does not assume
continuity.--DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS, a method of treating the values of
ratios of differentials or the increments of quantities continually
varying; INTEGRAL CALCULUS, the summation of an infinite series of
differentials. [L.--_calx_.]

CALDRON. Same as CAULDRON.

CALEDONIAN, kal-e-d[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Caledonia_, or
Scotland.--_n._ a Scotchman.

CALEFACTION, kal-e-fak'shun, _adj._ act of heating: state of being
heated.--_adj._ CALEF[=A]'CIENT, warming.--_n._ anything that warms: a
blister or superficial stimulant.--_adj._ CALEFAC'TIVE, communicating
heat.--_n._ CALEFAC'TOR, a small stove.--_adj._ CALEFAC'TORY,
warming.--_n._ a room in which monks warmed themselves: a warming-pan, a
pome.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ CAL'EFY, to grow warm: to make warm.--_n._
CALES'CENCE, increasing warmth. [L.,--_cal[=e]re_, to grow hot,
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CALENDAR, kal'en-dar, _n._ the mode of adjusting the natural divisions of
time with respect to each other for the purposes of civil life: an almanac
or table of months, days, and seasons, or of special facts, &c., as in the
'gardener's calendar,' &c.: a list of documents arranged chronologically
with summaries of contents, as in 'calendar of state papers:' a list of
canonised saints, or of prisoners awaiting trial: any list or
record.--_v.t._ to place in a list: to analyse and index.--_ns._
CAL'ENDARER, CAL'ENDARIST. [O. Fr. _calendier_--L. _calendarium_, an
account-book, _kalendæ_, calends.]

CALENDER, kal'en-d[.e]r, _n._ a press consisting of two rollers for
smoothing and dressing cloth, paper, &c.: a person who calenders, properly
a calendrer.--_v.t._ to dress in a calender.--_ns._ CAL'ENDERING;
CAL'ENDRER, one whose business it is to calender cloth; CAL'ENDRY, a place
where calendering is done. [Fr. _calandre_--L. _cylindrus_--L.
_kylindros_.]

CALENDER, kal'en-d[.e]r, _n._ a word somewhat loosely used for dervish in
Persia and Central Asia. [Pers.]

CALENDS, kal'endz, _n._ among the Romans, the first day of each month. [L.
_Kalendæ_--_cal[)a]re_, Gr. _kalein_, to call, because the beginning of the
month was proclaimed.]

CALENTURE, kal'en-t[=u]r, _n._ a kind of fever or delirium occurring on
board ship in hot climates. [Fr. and Sp.--L. _calent-em_, _cal[=e]re_, to
be hot.]

CALESCENCE. See CALEFACTION.

CALF, käf, _n._ the young of the cow and of some other animals, as marine
mammals: calf-skin leather, bookbinding in such: a stupid or a cowardly
person:--_pl._ CALVES (kävz).--_ns._ CALF'-LOVE, an attachment between a
boy and girl; CALF'S'-FOOT, CALVES'-FOOT, the foot of the calf, used in
making a palatable jelly; CALF'-SKIN, the skin of the calf, making a good
leather for bookbinding and shoes.--DIVINITY CALF, a dark-brown calf
bookbinding, with blind stamping, and without gilding--common in the
binding of theological books; GOLDEN CALF, the idol set up by Aaron during
the absence of Moses on Sinai, or those erected by Jeroboam at Bethel and
Dan: worship of Mammon or wealth; HALF-CALF, a bookbinding in which the
back and corners are in calf-skin; MOTTLED CALF, a light coloured
bookbinding, decorated by the sprinkling of acid in drops; SMOOTH CALF, a
binding in plain or undecorated calf leather.--THE CALVES OF OUR LIPS
(Hosea, xiv. 2), an offering of praise (the Septuagint reads, 'The fruit of
our lips').--TREE CALF, a bright brown calf bookbinding, stained by acids
with a pattern resembling the trunk and branches of a tree. [A.S. _cealf_;
Ger. _kalb_.]

CALF, käf, _n._ the thick fleshy part of the leg behind.--_adj._ CALF'LESS,
with a thin, poor calf. [Ice. _kalfi_; perh. the same word as the
preceding.]

CALIBAN, kal'i-ban, _n._ a man of beastly nature, from the monster in
Shakespeare's _Tempest_.

CALIBRE, CALIBER, kal'i-b[.e]r, _n._ the size of the bore of a gun:
diameter: intellectual capacity.--_adj._ CAL'IBERED.--_v.t._ CAL'IBR[=A]TE,
to determine the calibre of.--_n._ CALIBR[=A]'TION. [Fr. _calibre_, the
bore of a gun; prob. L. _qu[=a] libr[=a]_, with what weight, or from Ar.
_q[=a]lib_, a form.]

CALICO, kal'i-k[=o], _n._ a cotton cloth, first brought from _Calicut_ in
India: plain white unprinted cotton cloth, bleached or unbleached: coarse
printed cotton cloth.--_adj._ made of calico: spotted--_n._
CAL'ICO-PRINT'ER, one employed in printing calicoes.

CALID, kal'id, _adj._ warm.--_n._ CALID'ITY. [L. _calidus_, hot.]

CALIF, CALIPH, k[=a]'lif, or kal'if, _n._ the name assumed by the
successors of Mohammed.--_ns._ CAL'IFATE, CAL'IPHATE, the office, rank, or
government of a calif. [Fr.--Ar. _khal[=i]fah_, a successor.]

CALIGINOUS, kal-ij'en-us, _adj._ dim, obscure, dark.--_n._ CALIGINOS'ITY.
[L. _caliginos-us_.]

CALIGRAPHY. See under CALLIGRAPHY.

CALIPASH, kal'i-pash, _n._ the part of a turtle close to the upper shell,
consisting of a fatty gelatinous substance of a dull greenish colour.--_n._
CAL'IPEE, the white portion from the belly--a fatty gelatinous substance of
a light-yellowish colour. [Prob. corr. of West Ind. words.]

CALIPERS, kal'i-p[.e]rz, CALIPER-COMPASSES, kal'i-p[.e]r-kum'pasez, _n.pl._
compasses with legs suitable for measuring the inside or outside diameter
of bodies. [Corr. of CALIBER.]

CALIPH, CALIPHATE. See CALIF.

CALIPPIC, kal-ip'ik, _adj._ four Metonic cycles less one day, or
seventy-six years. [From the Greek astronomer _Callipus_, a contemporary of
Aristotle.]

CALISAYA, kal-i-s[=a]'ya, _n._ a variety of Peruvian bark.

CALIVER, kal'i-v[.e]r, _n._ (_Shak._) a kind of light musket. [Same as
CALIBRE.]

CALIX. See CALYX.

CALIXTIN, CALIXTINE, kal-iks'tin, _adj._ of or belonging to the more
moderate party among the Hussites, so called from their demanding the cup
(L. _calix_) as well as the bread for the laity--also called U'TRAQUISTS
(L. _uterque_, both).--_n._ a follower of the Syncretist Lutheran divine,
George _Calixtus_ (1586-1656).

CALK. See CAULK.

CALK, kawk, _n._ a pointed piece of iron on a horse-shoe to prevent
slipping--also CALK'IN and CALK'ER.--_v.t._ to provide a shoe with a calk.
[L. _calc-em_, _calx_, a heel.]

CALK, CALQUE, kawk, _v.t._ to chalk, as the back of a drawing, &c., in
order to transfer it, to copy by tracing.--_n._ CALK'ING, the copying of a
picture by means of tracing.

CALL, kawl, _v.i._ to cry aloud (with _out_; _to_, _after_, _at_, _up_,
_down_): to make a short visit (with _upon_, _for_, _at_).--_v.t._ to name:
to summon: to appoint or proclaim: to designate or reckon: to select for a
special office, as in 'called to be an apostle,' 'to be called to the bar:'
(_coll._) to call bad names to some one.--_n._ a summons or invitation: an
impulse: a demand: a short visit: a shrill whistle: the cry of a bird:
admission to the rank of barrister: an invitation to the pastorate of a
congregation, also the written form of such with appended list of names of
persons concurring: (_coll._) occasion, cause.--_ns._ CALL'-AT-LARGE, a
form of pastoral call sometimes adopted by a presbytery where a
congregation is not unanimous, in which the name of the person to be called
is not inscribed beforehand, and names cannot be adhibited by mandate;
CALL'-BIRD, a bird trained to allure others into snares; CALL'-BOY, a boy
who waits upon the prompter in a theatre, and calls the actors when wanted
on the stage; CALL'ER, one who pays a short visit; CALL'ING, that station
to which a person is called by Providence to fill: one's trade, profession,
or occupation; CALL'ING-CRAB, a popular name for the fiddler-crab, which
waves its larger claw when disturbed; CALL'-NOTE, the note by which a bird
or beast calls its young.--CALL ATTENTION TO, to point out; CALL AWAY, to
divert the mind; CALL BACK, to recall; CALL FOR, to ask loudly: claim; CALL
FORTH, to bring or summon to action; CALL FOR TRUMPS, to lay down such
cards at whist as will induce one's partner to lead a trump; CALL IN, to
bring in from outside, as the notes in circulation, &c.; CALL IN QUESTION,
to challenge; CALL OFF, to summon away; CALL ON, or UPON, to invoke, appeal
to; CALL OUT, to challenge to fight, esp. a duel: to summon to service,
bring into operation; CALL OVER, to read aloud a list; CALL TO ACCOUNT, to
summon to render an account; CALL UP, to summon from beneath, or to a
tribunal. [A.S. _ceallian_; Ice. _kalla_, Dut. _kallen_.]

CALL, kawl, _n._ (_Spens._) a caul or cap.

CALLANT, käl'ant, _n._ a lad. [A modern Scotch word; Dut. _kalant_.]

CALLER, kal'[.e]r, _adj._ fresh: (_Scot._) cool. [Prob. the same as
CALVER.]

CALLET, kal'et, _n._ (_Shak._) a scold, a woman of bad character, a trull.
[Prob. Fr. _caillette_, a frivolous gossip; or prob. the Gael. _caille_,
girl, may be related.]

CALLID, kal'id, _adj._ shrewd.--_n._ CALLID'ITY, shrewdness. [L.
_callidus_, expert.]

CALLIGRAPHY, CALIGRAPHY, kal-lig'ra-fi, _n._ fine penmanship;
characteristic style of writing.--_adjs._ CALLIGRAPH'IC, -AL.--_ns._
CALLIG'RAPHIST, CALLIG'RAPHER. [Gr., _kalos_, beautiful, _graphein_, to
write.]

CALLIOPE, kal-[=i]'o-pe, _n._ the muse of epic poetry: an instrument
producing musical notes by means of steam-whistles, played by a keyboard.
[Gr.]

CALLIPERS. Same as CALIPERS.

CALLISTHENICS, kal-is-then'iks, _n.pl._ exercises for the purpose of
promoting gracefulness as well as strength of body.--_adj._ CALLISTHEN'IC.
[Gr. _kalos_, beautiful, _sthenos_, strength.]

CALLOUS, kal'us, _adj._ hardened: unfeeling or insensible.--_n._
CALLOS'ITY, a hard swelling on the skin.--_adv._ CALL'OUSLY.--_n._
CALL'OUSNESS. [L. _callosus_--_callus_, hard skin.]

CALLOW, kal'[=o], _adj._ not covered with feathers: unfledged, unbearded:
inexperienced: low-lying and liable to be submerged.--_n._ an alluvial
flat. [A.S. _calu_; Ger. _kahl_, L. _calvus_, bald.]

CALLUS, kal'us, _n._ a thickening of the skin: a term employed in old
surgical works for the exuded material by which fractures of bones are
consolidated together. [L.]

CALM, käm, _adj._ still or quiet: serene, tranquil.--_n._ absence of
wind--also in _pl._: repose: serenity of feelings or actions.--_v.t._ to
make calm: to quiet.--_ns._ CALM'ANT, CALM'ATIVE--in medical
language.--_adjs._ CALM'ATIVE, CALM'ANT, CALMED, CALM'Y (_Spens._)--_adv._
CALM'LY.--_n._ CALM'NESS. [Fr. _calme_ (It. _calma_), from Low L.
_cauma_--Gr. _kauma_, noonday heat--_kai-ein_, to burn.]

CALMUCK. See KALMUCK.

CALOMEL, kal'[=o]-mel, _n._ the popular name of one of the compounds of
mercury and chlorine, much used in medicine. [Fr. _calomel_, which Littré
derives from Gr. _kalos_, fair, _melas_, black.]

CALORIC, ka-lor'ik, _n._ heat: the supposed principle or cause of
heat.--_n._ CALORES'CENCE, the transmutation of heat rays into luminous
rays.--_adj._ CALORIF'IC, causing heat: heating.--_ns._ CALORIFIC[=A]'TION;
CALORIM'ETER, an instrument for measuring the specific heat of a body;
CALORIM'ETRY, the art or process of measuring heat; CAL'ORIST, one who held
heat to be a subtle fluid called caloric; CAL'ORY, the usually accepted
thermal unit, being the quantity of heat necessary to raise the temperature
of a kilogram of water from 0° to 1° centigrade. [Fr. _calorique_, formed
by Lavoisier from L. _calor_, heat.]

CALOTTE, kal-ot', _n._ a plain skull-cap or coif worn by R.C. clergy. [Fr.]

CALOTYPE, kal'[=o]-t[=i]p, _n._ a kind of photography.--_n._ CAL'OTYPIST,
one who makes calotypes. [Gr. _kalos_, beautiful, _typos_, an image. Name
given in 1840 by W. H. Fox Talbot (1800-77) to his method of photographing
by the action of light on nitrate of silver.]

CALOYER, ka-loi'[.e]r, _n._ a Greek monk, esp. of the order of St Basil.
[Fr.,--It.--Late Gr. _kalog[=e]ros_, _kalos_, beautiful, _g[=e]ros_, aged.]

CALP, kalp, _n._ the name applied in Ireland to beds of shale, sandstone,
&c. containing thin seams of coal.

CALPAC, CALPACK, kal'pak, _n._ a triangular felt cap, worn by Turks and
Tartars. [Turk.]

CALQUE. See CALK (3).

CALTROP, kal'trop, _n._ an instrument armed with four spikes, so arranged
that one always stands upright, used to obstruct the progress of an enemy's
cavalry, or of besiegers of a fortification.--Also CAL'TRAP. [A.S.
_coltetræppe_, _calcatrippe_--L. _calc-em_, heel, _trappa_, a trap.]

CALUMBA, ka-lum'ba, _n._ the root of an East African plant, extensively
used in medicine as a stomachic and tonic. [From _Colombo_ in Ceylon.]

CALUMET, kal'[=u]-met, _n._ the 'peace pipe' of the North American Indians,
a tobacco-pipe having a stem of reed or painted wood about 2½ feet long,
decorated with feathers, with a large bowl, usually of soap-stone.
[_Calumet_ is a Norman name for a shepherd's pipe (Fr. _chalumeau_--L.
_calamellus_, _calamus_), given by the early French settlers from its
resemblance.]

CALUMNY, kal'um-ni, _n._ false accusation: slander.--_v.t._ CALUM'NI[=A]TE,
to accuse falsely: to slander.--_v.i._ to spread evil reports.--_ns._
CALUM'NI[=A]TION; CALUM'NI[=A]TOR.--_adjs._ CALUM'NI[=A]TORY, CALUM'NIOUS,
of the nature of calumny: slanderous.--_adv._ CALUM'NIOUSLY.--OATH OF
CALUMNY, a method in the law of Scotland for the prevention of calumnious
and unnecessary suits, by which both parties at the beginning of a cause
swear, either by themselves or their counsel, that the facts set forth by
them are true--usual only in actions of divorce, &c. [L. _calumnia_, prob.
for _calvomnia_, from _calvi_, _calv[)e]re_, to deceive.]

CALVARY, kal'va-ri, _n._ the name of the place where Jesus was crucified:
(_R.C._) a series of representations of the various scenes of Christ's
crucifixion: an eminence crowned with one or three crosses bearing
life-size figures of Jesus and the two thieves. [The Anglicised form of the
Vulgate _calvaria_, which was the L. rendering of the Gr. _kranion_, as
that again of the Aramaic _gogulth[=o]_ or _gogolth[=a]_ (Heb.
_gulg[=o]leth_--Græcised form _golgotha_), all three words meaning skull.]

CALVE, käv, _v.i._ to bring forth a calf. [A.S. _cealfian_. See CALF.]

CALVERED, kal'verd, _p.adj._ from obsolete verb CAL'VER, to prepare salmon
or other fish when freshly caught. [Prob. the same as Scot. _Caller_.]

CALVINISM, kal'vin-izm, _n._ the doctrines of the great Genevan religious
reformer, John _Calvin_ (1509-1564), as these are given in his
_Institutio_, esp. as regards particular election, predestination, the
incapacity for true faith and repentance of the natural man, efficacious
grace, and final perseverance.--_n._ CAL'VINIST, one who holds the
doctrines of Calvin.--_adjs._ CALVINIST'IC, -AL, pertaining to Calvin or
Calvinism.

CALVITIES, kal-vish'i-[=e]z, _n._ baldness. [L.,--_calvus_, bald.]

CALX, kalks, _n._ chalk or lime: the substance of a metal or mineral which
remains after being subjected to violent heat:--_pl._ CALXES (kalk's[=e]z),
or CALCES (kal's[=e]z). [L. _calx_, lime.]

CALYCANTHUS, kal-i-kan'thus, _n._ a small order of square-stemmed aromatic
shrubs, natives of North America and Japan. [Made up of CALYX and Gr.
_anthos_.]

CALYPTRA, ka-lip'tra, _n._ a hood, covering, esp. that of the theca or
capsule of mosses.--_adjs._ CALYP'TRATE, furnished with such;
CALYP'TRIFORM, CALYPTRIMOR'PHOUS, having the form of a calyptra.--_n._
CALYP'TROGEN, the root-cap. [Gr., a veil.]

CALYX, CALIX, kal'iks, or k[=a]'liks, _n._ the outer covering or cup of a
flower, its separate leaves termed sepals:--_pl._ CALYCES, or
CALYXES.--_adjs._ CAL'YCATE, having a calyx; CALYC[=I]F'EROUS, bearing the
calyx; CALYCIFL[=O]'RAL, CALYCIFL[=O]'RATE, CALYCIFL[=O]'ROUS, having the
petals and stamens borne upon the calyx; CALYC'IFORM, having the form of a
calyx; CAL'YCINE, CALYC'INAL, pertaining to a calyx.--_n._ CAL'YCLE, an
accessory calyx outside the true one.--_adjs._ CAL'YCLED, having a calycle;
CAL'YCOID, CALYCOI'DEOUS, like a calyx. [L.,--Gr. _kalyx_--_kalyptein_, to
cover.]

CAM, kam, _n._ (_mech._) a device for changing a regular rotary motion into
a reciprocating motion, various forms of which are the cam-wheel and shaft,
the heart-wheel, the wiper-wheel, and the eccentric. [Dut. _kam_.]

CAMAIEU, kam'[=i]-[=u], _n._ a cameo: a painting in monochrome, or in
simple colours not imitating nature: a style of printing pictures producing
the effect of a pencil-drawing.--Also CAM'AYEU. [Fr. See CAMEO.]

CAMARADERIE, kam-a-rad-r[=e]', _n._ good-fellowship: the intimacy of
comradeship. [Fr.]

CAMARILLA, kam-ar-il'a, _n._ a body of secret intriguers, esp. of a court
party against a king's legitimate ministers: a small room. [Sp. dim. of
_camara_, a chamber.]

CAMASS, ka-mas', _n._ a small plant growing in the north-western United
States, also its nutritious bulb.--_ns._ CAMASS'IA, a genus of liliaceous
plants nearly related to the European _Scilla_; CAMASS'-RAT, a small gopher
rodent which devours the bulbs of the camass.

CAMBER, kam'b[.e]r, _n._ a convexity upon an upper surface, as of a deck
amidships, a bridge, or lintel: the curve of a ship's plank: a small dock
in the royal yards where timber is loaded and discharged.--_v.t._ to curve
ship-planks, to arch slightly. [Fr.--L. _camer[=a]re_, to vault.]

CAMBIST, kam'bist, _n._ one skilled in the science of exchange.--_ns._
CAM'BISM, CAM'BISTRY. [It--L. _camb[=i]re_, to exchange.]

CAMBERWELL BEAUTY, kam'ber-wel b[=u]'ti, _n._ (_Vanessa antiopa_) a fancy
name for one of the largest and most beautiful of British butterflies.

CAMBIUM, kam'bi-um, _n._ a layer of vascular tissue formed between the wood
and the bark of exogens, in which the annual growth is formed. [Low
L.--_cambium_--L. _camb[=i]re_, to change.]

CAMBOGE, obsolete form of GAMBOGE.

CAMBREL, kam'brel, _n._ a bent piece of wood or iron on which butchers hang
the carcasses of animals: the hock of a horse. [Prob. conn. with CAMBER.]

CAMBRIAN, kam'bri-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Cambria_ or Wales: Welsh: the
name given by Sedgwick in 1836 to a group or series of sedimentary deposits
which come next in order to the Archæan System.--_n._ an inhabitant of
Cambria, or Wales. [Formed from _Cymry_, Welshmen, or _Cymru_, Wales.]

CAMBRIC, k[=a]m'brik, _n._ a kind of fine white linen, originally
manufactured at _Cambrai_ in the French department of Nord.

CAMBUCA, kam-b[=u]'ka, _n._ a pastoral staff: a curved stick used in the
game of pall-mall.--Also CAMBUT'TA. [Low L., of Celt. origin.]

CAME, k[=a]m, did come _pa.t._ of COME.

CAMEL, kam'el, _n._ an animal of Asia and Africa with one or two humps on
its back, used as a beast of burden and for riding.--_adj._ CAM'EL-BACKED,
hump-backed.--_ns._ CAM'ELEER, one who drives or rides a camel; CAM'ELINE,
camlet.--_adj._ CAM'ELISH, like a camel, obstinate.--_n._ CAM'ELRY, troops
mounted on camels.--CAMEL'S HAIR, the hair of the camel: the hair of the
squirrel's tail used for paint-brushes; CAMEL'S THORN, a shrub of the bean
family which camels eat greedily. [L. _camelus_--Gr. _kam[=e]los_--Heb.
_g[=a]m[=a]l_.]

CAMELEON. See CHAMELEON.

CAMELLIA, ka-mel'ya, _n._ a species of evergreen shrubs, natives of China
and Japan, noted for the singular beauty of their flowers. [Named from
Kamel, Latinised _Camellus_, a Moravian Jesuit, who collected plants in the
Philippine Islands in 1639.]

CAMELOPARD, kam'el-[=o]-pärd, or kam-el'[=o]-pärd, _n._ the giraffe.
[L.,--Gr. _cam[=e]lopardalis_; from Gr. _kam[=e]los_, the camel, and
_pardalis_, the panther.]

CAMELOT, kam'lot, _n._ Same as CAMLET.

CAMEO, kam'[=e]-[=o], _n._ an engraved gem in which the figure or subject
is carved in relief. [It. _camméo_ (Fr. _camée_)--Low L. _cammæus_ traced
by Littré to Gr. _kamnein_, to work; by the late Mr C. W. King through an
Ar. form, 'an amulet,' from Pers. _camahen_, loadstone, the usual material
for Babylonian cylinders.]

CAMERA, kam'[.e]r-a, _n._ the variety of camera-obscura used by
photographers.--_ns._ CAM'ERA-L[=U]'CIDA, an instrument by which the rays
of light from an object are reflected by a specially shaped prism, forming
an image on the paper underneath; CAM'ERA-OBSC[=U]'RA, an instrument for
throwing the images of external objects on a white surface placed within a
dark chamber or box. [L.]

CAMERA, kam'[.e]r-a, _n._ a vaulted room: the judge's private chamber (IN
CAMERA, of a case heard there rather than in public court).--_adj._
CAM'ER[=A]TED, divided into chambers: arched or vaulted.

CAMERONIAN, kam-er-[=o]n'i-an, _n._ a follower of the Covenanter Richard
_Cameron_, killed at Airds Moss in 1680, a member of the Reformed
Presbyterian Church.--_adj._ pertaining to this party, or to the famous
Cameronian regiment (26th Foot, now the First Battalion of Scottish Rifles)
in the British army, which had its origin in a body of Cameronians (1689).

CAMIS, kam'is, _n._ (_Spens._) a loose robe made of some light material, as
silk, &c.: a chemise. [See CHEMISE.]

CAMISADE, kam-i-s[=a]d', _n._ a night attack, probably because shirts were
often put on over the armour.--Also CAMISAD'O. [Sp., from _camisa_, a
shirt.]

CAMISARDS, kam'is-ar, _n.pl._ the insurgent Huguenots of the Cevennes, so
called from the _camise_ or blouse worn by the peasants.

CAMISE, kam'[=e]s, _n._ the usual Arab shirt.--Also CAM'ISO, CAM'ESE.

CAMISOLE, kam'is-[=o]l, _n._ a sleeved jacket, a woman's loose morning gown
or jacket.

CAMLET, kam'let, _n._ a cloth originally made of camel's hair, but now
chiefly of wool and goat's hair. [Fr.--Low L. _camelotum_--L. _camelus_.]

CAMOMILE, CHAMOMILE, kam'o-m[=i]l, _n._ a plant, or its dried flowers, used
in medicine, affording a bitter stomachic and tonic. [Fr.--L.--Gr.
_chamaim[=e]lon_, the earth-apple, from the apple-like smell of its
blossoms--_chamai_, on the ground, _m[=e]lon_, an apple.]

CAMORRA, kam-or'a, _n._ the name of a secret society in the former kingdom
of Naples, whose members, the _Camorristi_, for many years terrorised the
country.--_ns._ CAMORR'ISM; CAMORR'IST. [It.]

CAMP, kamp, _n._ the ground on which an army pitch their tents: the tents
of an army, quarters generally, a permanent military station, as at
Aldershot: any fortified site in which a force once defended itself, as a
Roman or British camp: any temporary quarters for travellers, &c.--_v.i._
to encamp or pitch tents.--_ns._ CAMP'-FOLL'OWER, any one who follows in
the train of an army, but takes no part in battle; CAMP'MEET'ING, a
religious gathering held in the open air or in a temporary encampment in
the fields; CAMP'-SHED'DING, -SHEET'ING, -SHOT, an erection of piles, &c.,
along the bank of a river or an embankment, for strengthening; CAMP'-STOOL,
or -BED'STEAD, a portable folding-stool, a trestle-bed. [Fr. _camp_, a
camp--L. _campus_, a plain.]

CAMP, kamp, _n._ (_obs._) conflict: an old form of the game of
football.--_v.i._ to fight, struggle.--_v.i._ CAM'PLE, to wrangle. [A.S.
_camp_, battle; cf. Ger. _kampf_.]

CAMPAGNOL, kam-pa-nyol', _n._ a French name for several species of
field-mice or voles.

CAMPAIGN, kam-p[=a]n', _n._ a large open field or plain: the time during
which an army keeps the field: an excursion into the country: an organised
series of operations in the advocacy of a political or social
cause.--_v.i._ to serve in a campaign.--_ns._ CAMPAGN'A, once equivalent to
_champaign_, now used only of the Campagna, an undulating, mostly
uncultivated and unhealthy plain around Rome; CAMPAIGN'ER, one who has
served in several campaigns. [Fr. _campagne_--L. _campania_--_campus_, a
field.]

CAMPANERO, kam-pa-n[=e]'ro, _n._ one of the South American bell-birds, the
arapunga, &c. [Sp., a bellman.]

CAMPANILE, kam-pan-[=e]'l[=a] (sometimes also kam-pan-[=e]l', and even
kam'pan-il and kam'pan-[=i]l), _n._ a name adopted from the Italian to
signify a bell-tower of the larger kind, and usually applied only to such
as are detached from the church: (_pl._ usually CAMPANILES, but sometimes
the It. CAMPANILI). [It., from _campana_, a bell.]

CAMPANOLOGY, kam-pan-ol'o-ji, _n._ the subject or science of bells or
bell-ringing.--_ns._ CAM'PANIST, CAMPANOL'OGIST, one skilled in the
same.--_adj._ CAMPANOLOG'ICAL. [It. _campana_, a bell, and Gr. _logos_, a
discourse.]

CAMPANULA, kam-pan'[=u]-la, _n._ a genus of flowers, commonly known as
bell-flowers or bells, usually blue or white, the best-known species the
harebell and Scotch bluebell.--The _Canterbury Bells_ is a biennial
species--seen in many florists' varieties.--_adjs._ CAMPAN'IFORM,
CAMPAN'ULATE, CAMPAN'ULAR.--_n._ CAMPANUL[=A]'RIA, a common genus of
Hydroids, with stems simple or branched, the nutritive polyps surrounded by
transparent bell-shaped sheaths. [It. _campana_, a bell.]

CAMPBELLITE, kam'bel-[=i]t, _n._ a follower of Alexander _Campbell_
(1788-1866), founder of the sect known as the 'Disciples of Christ.'

CAMPEACHY, kam'p[=e]ch-i, _adj._ pertaining to the red dye-wood better
known as Logwood, first exported from _Campeachy_ in Yucatan.

CAMPEADOR, kam-pe-a-d[=o]r', _n._ a warrior. [Sp.]

CAMPESTRAL, kam-pes'tral, _adj._ growing in or pertaining to fields.--Also
CAMPES'TRIAN. [L. _campestris_, from _campus_.]

CAMPHINE, kam'f[=i]n, _n._ rectified oil of turpentine.--Also CAM'PHENE.

CAMPHOR, kam'for, _n._ a solid essential oil, mostly obtained from the
camphor laurel of India, China, and Japan, having a peculiar hot aromatic
taste and a pleasant smell.--_adj._ CAMPHOR[=A]'CEOUS, like
camphor.--_v.t._ CAM'PHORATE, to impregnate with camphor.--_adjs._
CAM'PHORATE, CAMPHOR'IC, pertaining to camphor. [Fr. _camphre_--Low L.
_camphora_--Malay _kapur_, chalk.]

CAMPION, kam'pi-un, _n._ the common name of plants belonging to the genera
Lychnis and Silene. [Perh. from L. _campus_, a field.]

CAMPO SANTO, kam'po sant'o, _n._ the Italian name for a cemetery or
burying-ground, esp. for one enclosed by an arcade. [Lit. 'holy ground,'
the earth of that at Pisa having been brought from Palestine.]

CAMPYLOSPERMOUS, kam-pi-l[=o]-sper'mus, _adj._ (_bot._) having the albumen
of the seed curved at the margin so as to form a longitudinal furrow on the
ventral face. [Gr. _kampylos_, curved, _sperma_, a seed.]

CAMPYLOTROPAL, kam-pi-lot'r[=o]-pal, _adj._ (_bot._) curved so as to bring
the true apex close to the base--of an ovule or seed.--Also
CAMPYLOT'ROPOUS. [Gr. _kampylos_, curved, _trepein_, to turn.]

CAMSTAIRY, kam-st[=a]r'i, _adj._ perverse, unruly. [Ety. dub.; first part
at any rate _cam_, crooked.]

CAMSTONE, kam'st[=o]n, _n._ a kind of clay used to whiten doorsteps, &c.

CAM-WOOD, kam'-wood, _n._ a dye-wood obtained from _Baphia nitida_, a
leguminous tree, a native of Angola. It is at first white, but turns red on
exposure to air. [Perh. from African name _kambi_.]

CAN, kan, _v.i._ to be able: to have sufficient power:--_pa.t._ COULD.--CAN
is used for _gan_ in M. E. and even in Spenser. [A.S. _cunnan_, to know
(how to do a thing), to be able, pres. indic. _can_; Goth. _kunnan_, Ger.
_können_, to be able. See KNOW.]

CAN, kan, _n._ a vessel for holding or carrying liquids, generally of
tinned iron, with a handle over the top: a chimney-pot: a vessel of
tin-plate in which meat, fruit, &c. are hermetically sealed for
exporting--in England usually called a _tin_: a drinking-mug.--_v.t._ to
put up for preservation in cans.--_n.pl._ CANNED'-GOODS, meat, fruit, &c.
so prepared for preservation.--_n._ CAN'NERY, a place where meat, fish,
fruit, &c. are canned. [A.S. _canne_; cf. L. _canna_, a reed, Gr.
_kann[=e]_, a reed.]

CANAANITE, k[=a]'nan-[=i]t, _n._ a descendant of _Canaan_, the son of Ham:
a native of the land of Canaan.--_adj._ C[=A]'NAANITISH.

CAÑADA, kan'ya-da, _n._ a narrow cañon. [Sp.]

CANADIAN, ka-n[=a]'di-an, _adj._ and _n._ pertaining to _Canada_: a native
of Canada.--CANADA BALSAM (see BALSAM).

CANAIGRE, ka-n[=a]'ger, _n._ a Texan dock whose root is used in tanning,

CANAILLE, ka-n[=a]l', _n._ the mob, the vulgar rabble. [Fr., a dog--L.
_canis_.]

CANAKIN. See CANNIKIN.

CANAL, kan-al', _n._ an artificial watercourse for navigation: a duct in
the body for any of its fluids.--_n._ CANAL'-BOAT, a boat for canal
traffic.--_adjs._ CANALIC'ULAR, canal-shaped; CANALIC'ULATE, -D,
channelled, grooved.--_ns._ CANALIC'ULUS (_anat._), a small furrow or
channel; CANALIS[=A]'TION, the construction of canals.--_v.t._ CANAL'ISE,
to make a canal through: to convert into a canal. [L. _canalis_, a
water-pipe.]

CANARD, ka-när', or ka-närd', _n._ an extravagant or lying story. [Fr.,
lit. 'duck.']

CANARY, ka-n[=a]'ri, _n._ a light sweet wine from the _Canary_ Islands: a
bird originally from the Canary Islands: a lively dance.--_adj._
canary-coloured, bright yellow.--_ns._ CAN[=A]'RY-BIRD, a canary: (_slang_)
a jail-bird: a mistress; CAN[=A]'RY-GRASS, a grass of which the seed is
much used as food for canary-birds; CAN[=A]'RY-WOOD, the dark-coloured
timber of two lauraceous trees of the Azores and Madeira.

CANARESE, kan-a-r[=e]z', _adj._ pertaining to _Canara_ in western
India.--_n._ a native thereof: the language of the Dravidian group, allied
to Telegu.--Also KANARESE'.

CANASTER, ka-nas't[.e]r, _n._ a kind of tobacco, so called from the rush
basket in which it was originally brought from Spanish America. [Sp.
_canastra_--L.--Gr. _kanastron_.]

CAN-CAN, kan-kan, _n._ a dance in some public balls at Paris and elsewhere,
characterised by immodest gestures and postures. [Usually referred to L.
_quamquam_, the pronunciation of which was long hotly disputed in the
French schools; Littré quotes an O. Fr. _caquehan_, a noisy assembly.]

CANCEL, kan'sel, _v.t._ to erase or blot out by crossing with lines: to
annul or suppress, as a printed page, &c.: to obliterate: to frustrate: to
counterbalance or compensate for: to remove equivalent quantities on
opposite sides of an equation:--_pr.p._ can'celling; _pa.p._
can'celled.--_n._ the suppression of a printed page or sheet, the page so
cancelled, or the new one substituted. [Fr. _canceller_--L.
_cancell-[=a]re_, from _cancelli_, railings, lattice-work, dim. of
_cancer_.]

CANCELLI, kan-sel'[=i], _n.pl._ cross-pieces forming a lattice-work or
grating, as in the division between the choir and the body of a church:
(_anat._) reticulations.--_adjs._ CAN'CELLATE, -D, marked latticewise,
reticulated.--_n._ CANCELL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CAN'CELLOUS. [L., a lattice.]

CANCER, kan's[.e]r, _n._ the name for an important group of malignant
tumours, divided into two groups, _Carcinomata_ and _Sarcomata_, the name
being now strictly used only of the former: a constellation between Gemini
and Leo, and a sign of the zodiac showing the limits of the sun's course
northward in summer: the typical genus of the family _Cancridæ_--_v.i._
CANCER'ATE, to become cancerous.--_ns._ CANCER[=A]'TION; CAN'CERITE, a
petrified crab.--_adj._ CAN'CEROUS, of or like a cancer.--_adv._
CAN'CEROUSLY.--_n._ CAN'CEROUSNESS.--_adjs._ CAN'CRIFORM, CAN'CROID,
crab-like. [L. _cancer_; cog. with Gr. _karkinos_, a crab.]

CANCIONERO, kan-th[=e]-on-[=e]'ro, _n._ a collection of songs. [Sp.]

CANDELABRUM, kan-de-l[=a]'brum, _n._ a branched and ornamented
candlestick:--_pl._ CANDEL[=A]'BRA. [L.]

CANDENT, kan'dent, _adj._ making white: glowing with heat.

CANDESCENCE, kan-des'ens, _n._ a white heat.--_adj._ CANDES'CENT. [L.
_candesc-[)e]re_, inceptive of _cand-[=e]re_, to glow.]

CANDID, kan'did, _adj._ frank, ingenuous: free from prejudice: fair,
impartial.--_adv._ CAN'DIDLY.--_n._ CAN'DIDNESS. [Fr. _candide_--L.
_candidus_, white--_cand-[=e]re_, to shine.]

CANDIDATE, kan'di-d[=a]t, _n._ one who offers himself for any office or
honour, so called because, at Rome, the applicant used to dress in
white.--_ns._ CAN'DIDATURE, CAN'DIDATESHIP, CAN'DIDACY. [L. _candidatus_,
from _candidus_.]

CANDIED. See CANDY.

CANDLE, kan'dl, _n._ wax, tallow, or other like substance surrounding a
wick: a light.--_ns._ CAN'DLE-BERR'Y, the wax-myrtle, also its fruit: the
fruit of _Aleurites triloba_, the candle-berry tree; CAN'DLE-BOMB, a small
glass bomb filled with water, exploding on being held in a candle-flame;
CAN'DLE-COAL (same as CANNEL-COAL); CAN'DLE-DIP'PING, the method of making
candles by dipping instead of moulding; CAN'DLE-END, the end-piece of a
burnt-out candle; CAN'DLE-FISH, the eulachon, a deep-sea fish of the smelt
family found along the north-west coast of America, producing eulachon oil:
another West American fish, resembling a pollock--the _black candle-fish_
or _horse-mackerel_; CAN'DLE-HOLD'ER, one who holds a candle to another
while working--hence one who renders another slight assistance, or humours
him; CAN'DLE-LIGHT, the light of a candle, illumination by means of
candles: the time when candles are lighted; CAN'DLE-LIGHT'ER, one whose
business is to light the candles: a spill; CAN'DLE-POW'ER, the illuminating
power of a standard sperm candle--a unit of luminosity; CAN'DLESTICK, an
instrument for holding a candle, originally a stick or piece of wood;
CAN'DLE-WAST'ER, one who studies late; CAN'DLE-WOOD, the wood of various
West Indian and Mexican resinous trees.--BURN THE CANDLE AT BOTH ENDS, to
waste in two directions at once.--NOT FIT TO HOLD A CANDLE TO, not fit even
to be some one's inferior, not to be compared with.--SELL BY THE CANDLE, to
offer for sale as long as a small piece of candle burns, the bid made just
before it goes out being successful.--THE GAME IS NOT WORTH THE CANDLE, the
thing is not worth the labour or expense of it. [A.S. _candel_--L.
_candela_, from _cand-[=e]re_, to glow.]

CANDLEMAS, kan'dl-mas, _n._ a festival of the R.C. Church in honour of the
purification of the Virgin Mary, on 2d February, and so called from the
number of candles used. [CANDLE and MASS.]

CANDOCK, kan'dok, _n._ the yellow water-lily. [CAN (n.) and DOCK.]

CANDOUR, kan'dur, _n._ freedom from prejudice or disguise: sincerity:
justice: openness. [L. _candor_, whiteness, from _cand[=e]re_, to be
shining.]

CANDY, kan'di, SUGAR-CANDY, shoog'ar-kan'di, _n._ a sweetmeat made of
sugar: anything preserved in sugar.--_v.t._ to preserve or dress with
sugar: to congeal or crystallise as sugar.--_v.i._ to become
congealed.--_p.adj._ CAN'DIED, encrusted with candy or sugar: (_fig._)
sugared, flattering. [Fr. _candi_, from Ar. _qandah_, candy.]

CANDY, kan'di, _n._ a South Indian weight, generally containing 20 maunds,
about 500 pounds English.--Also CAN'DIE and KAN'DY. [Tamil.]

CANE, k[=a]n, _n._ the stem of one of the smaller palms--the calamus or
rattan, or the larger grasses--bamboo and sugar-cane: a
walking-stick.--_v.t._ to beat with a cane.--_ns._ CANE'-BRAKE, a brake or
thicket of canes; CANE'-CHAIR, a chair made of rattan; CANE'-MILL, a mill
for bruising sugar-canes for the manufacture of sugar; CANE'-S[=U]'GAR,
sugar obtained from the sugar-cane; CANE'-TRASH, refuse of sugar-cane used
for fuel in boiling the juice; C[=A]N'ING, a thrashing with a cane.--_adj._
C[=A]N'Y, made of cane.--MALACCA CANE, a walking-cane made without removing
the bark from the brown-mottled or clouded stem of the palm, _Calamus
Scipionum_, brought from Singapore or Sumatra. [Fr. _canne_--L.
_canna_--Gr. _kann[=e]_, a reed.]

CANELLA, kan-el'a, _n._ a genus of low aromatic trees, one species the
whitewood of wild cinnamon of the West Indies, yielding _canella_ or white
cinnamon bark.

CANEPHOR, kan'e-f[=o]r, _n._ (_archit._) a female figure bearing a basket
on her head. [Gr. _kan[=e]phoros_, one of the bearers upon their heads at
the Panathenaic festival of the baskets containing the sacrificial
implements.]

CANESCENT, ka-nes'ent, _adj._ tending to white: hoary. [L.
_canescens_--_can[=e]re_--_canus_, hoary.]

CANGUE, CANG, kang, _n._ a Chinese portable pillory borne on the shoulders
by petty offenders. [Fr. _cangue_--Port. _cango_, a yoke.]

CANICULAR, ka-nik'[=u]-lar, _adj._ pertaining to the Dog-star (CANIC'ULA)
or to the Dog-days: (_coll._ and _hum._) pertaining to a dog. [L.
_canicularis_, _canicula_, dim. of _canis_, a dog.]

CANINE, ka-n[=i]n', _adj._ like or pertaining to the dog.--CANINE APPETITE,
an inordinate appetite; CANINE LETTER = R; CANINE TEETH, the four
sharp-pointed tearing teeth in most mammals, one on each side of the upper
and lower jaw, between the incisors or cutting teeth and the molars or
grinders. [L. _caninus_, _canis_, a dog.]

CANISTER, kan'is-t[.e]r, _n._ a box or case, usually of tin, for holding
tea, shot, &c.: short for canister-shot, or case-shot.--_n._ CAN'ISTER-SHOT
(same as CASE-SHOT, q.v.). [L. _canistrum_, a wicker-basket; Gr.
_kanastron_--_kann[=e]_, a reed.]

CANITIES, ka-nish'i-[=e]z, _n._ whiteness of the hair.

CANKER, kang'k[.e]r, _n._ an eating sore: a gangrene: a disease in trees,
or in horses' feet: anything that corrupts, consumes, irritates, or
decays.--_v.t._ to eat into, corrupt, or destroy: to infect or pollute: to
make sour and ill-conditioned.--_v.i._ to grow corrupt: to decay.--_adj._
CANK'ERED, corroded: venomous, malignant: soured: crabbed.--_adv._
CANK'EREDLY.--_n._ CANK'EREDNESS.--_adj._ CANK'EROUS, corroding like a
canker.--_n._ CANK'ER-WORM, a worm that cankers or eats into
plants.--_adj._ CANK'ERY, affected with canker: (_Scot._) crabbed. [L.
_cancer_, a crab, gangrene.]

CANNA, kan'na, _n._ a genus of reed-like plants--_Indian shot_: the upright
stem of a candlestick, &c.: the tube by which the wine was taken from the
chalice. [L., a reed.]

CANNA, kan'na, _n._ cotton-grass. [Gael. _cánach_.]

CANNABIC, kan'a-bik, _adj._ pertaining to hemp.--_ns._ CANN'ABIN, a resin
obtained from the plant _Cannabis Indica_; CANN'ABIS, a genus of
urticaceous plants, yielding bhang.

CANNEL, kan'el, _n._ a bituminous coal that burns with a bright flame, and
is much used for making coal oils and gas.--Also CANN'EL-COAL,
CAN'DLE-COAL. [Prob. conn. with CANDLE, because of the similarity in
burning.]

CANNELURE, kan'e-l[=u]r, _n._ a groove or a fluting: a groove round the
cylindrical part of a bullet. [Fr.]

CANNIBAL, kan'i-bal, _n._ one who eats human flesh.--_adj._ relating to
cannibalism.--_n._ CANN'IBALISM, the practice of eating human
flesh.--_adj._ CANNIBALIST'IC--_adv._ CANN'IBALLY (_Shak._). [Sp., a corr.
of _Caribals_ (Eng. _Caribs_), the native name of the West India Islanders,
who ate human flesh.]

CANNIKIN, kan'i-kin, _n._ a small can. [Dim. of CAN.]

CANNON, kan'un, _n._ a great gun used in war: a stroke in billiards in
which the player hits both the red and his opponent's ball.--_v.i._ to
cannonade: to make a cannon at billiards: to collide.--_n._ CANNONADE', an
attack with cannon.--_v.t._ to attack or batter with cannon.--_ns._
CANNONAD'ING; CANN'ON-BALL, a ball usually made of cast-iron, to be shot
from a cannon; CANN'ON-BIT, or CANN'ON, a smooth round bit; CANN'ON-BONE,
the long bone between the knee and the foot of a horse; CANNONEER',
CANNONIER', one who manages cannon; CANN'ON-GAME, a form of billiards in
which, the table having no pockets, the game consists in making a series of
cannons; CANN'ON-MET'AL, an alloy of about 90 parts of copper and 10 of
tin, from which cannon are manufactured.--_adj._ CANN'ON-PROOF, proof
against cannon-shot.--_ns._ CANN'ONRY, cannonading: artillery;
CANN'ON-SHOT, a cannon-ball: the distance to which a cannon will throw a
ball. [Fr. _canon_, from L. _canna_, a reed.]

CANNOT, kan'ot, _v.i._ to be unable. [CAN and NOT.]

CANNULA, kan'[=u]-la, _n._ a surgical tube, esp. that enclosing a trocar or
perforator, and the breathing-tube inserted in the windpipe after
tracheotomy.--_adj._ CANN'ULATE. [Dim. of _canna_, a reed.]

CANNY, kan'i, _adj._ (_Scot._) knowing: shrewd: having supernatural power
(see UNCANNY): comfortable: careful in money matters: gentle: sly or
pawky.--_adv._ CANN'ILY.--_n._ CANN'INESS.--TO CA' CANNY, to go or act
cautiously. [From CAN, to be able.]

CANOE, ka-n[=oo]', _n._ a boat made of the hollowed trunk of a tree, or of
bark or skins: a skiff driven by paddling.--_v.t._ to paddle a canoe.--_n._
CANOE'IST. [Sp. _canoa_--Haytian _canoa_.]

CAÑON, kan-yon', _n._ a deep gorge or ravine between high and steep banks,
worn by watercourses. [Sp. _cañon_, a hollow, from root of CANNON.]

CANON, kan'un, _n._ a law or rule, esp. in ecclesiastical matters: a
general rule: standard: the books of Scripture accepted as the standard or
rule of faith by the Christian Church: a species of musical composition:
one bound by certain vows over and above those binding upon regular members
of his community--a canon _regular_: a clerical dignitary belonging to a
cathedral, enjoying special emoluments, and obliged to reside there part of
the year: a list of saints canonised: (_print._) a large kind of
type.--_n._ CAN'ONESS, a female beneficiary of a regular religious
college.--_adjs._ CANON'IC, -AL, according to or included in the canon:
regular: ecclesiastical.--_adv._ CANON'ICALLY.--_n.pl._ CANON'ICALS, the
official dress of the clergy, regulated by the church canons.--_ns._
CANONIC'ITY, the state of belonging to the canon of Scripture;
CANONIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ CAN'ONISE, to enrol in the canon or list of
saints.--_n._ CAN'ONIST, one versed in the canon law.--_adj._
CANONIST'IC.--_ns._ CAN'ON-LAW, a digest of the formal decrees of councils,
oecumenical, general, and local, of diocesan and national synods, and of
patriarchal decisions as to doctrine and discipline; CAN'ONRY, the benefice
of a canon.--CANON OF THE MASS, that part of the mass which begins after
the 'Sanctus' with the prayer 'Te igitur,' and ends just before the
'Paternoster;' CANON RESIDENTIARY, a canon obliged to reside at a cathedral
and take a share in the duty; HONORARY CANON, one having the titular rank
of canon in a cathedral, but without duties or emoluments; MINOR CANON, a
cleric in orders, attached to a cathedral, his duty being to assist the
canons in singing divine service. [A.S., Fr., from L. _canon_--Gr.
_kan[=o]n_, a straight rod--_kann[=e]_, a reed.]

CANOPHILIST, ka-nof'i-list, _n._ a lover of dogs. [L. _canis_, a dog, Gr.
_philein_, to love.]

CANOPUS, ka-n[=o]'pus, _n._ a bright star in the southern constellation
_Argo navis_: an Egyptian vase for holding the entrails of the body
embalmed.--_adj._ CANOP'IC. [L.,--Gr.]

CANOPY, kan'o-pi, _n._ a covering over a throne or bed: a covering of state
stretched over the head: any covering, as the sky: a roof-like projection
over a niche, tomb, statue, &c.: the wooden covering over prebends' stalls
in cathedrals, pulpits, altars, &c.--_v.t._ to cover with a
canopy:--_pr.p._ can'opying; _pa.p._ can'opied. [Fr. _canapé_--Low L.
_canopeum_--Gr. _k[=o]n[=o]peion_, a mosquito curtain--_k[=o]n[=o]ps_, a
mosquito.]

CANOROUS, kan-[=o]'rus, _adj._ musical: melodious.--_adv._
CAN[=O]'ROUSLY.--_n._ CAN[=O]'ROUSNESS. [L. _canorus_, from _canor_,
melody--_can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CANSTICK, kan'stik, _n._ (_Shak._) a candlestick.

CANT, kant, _v.i._ to speak in a conventional manner: to use the language
of thieves, &c.: to talk in an affectedly solemn or hypocritical way.--_n._
a hypocritical or affected style of speech: the language peculiar to a
sect: odd or peculiar talk of any kind: _slang_: a common saying: affected
use of religious phrases or sentiments.--_n._ CANT'ER, one who cants, a
beggar: one who makes hypocritical professions.--_adj._ CANT'ING, whining,
pretending to piety: (_her._) allusive (see ALLUSIVE). [L. c_ant[=a]re_,
freq. of _can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CANT, kant, _n._ an inclination from the level: a toss or jerk: a sloping
or tilted position: one of the segments forming a side-piece in the head of
a cask: a ship's timber lying obliquely to the line of the keel.--_v.t._ to
turn on the edge or corner: to tilt or toss suddenly.--_ns._ CANT'ING,
tilting; CANT'ING-COIN; CANT'ING-WHEEL; CANT'-RAIL, a timber running along
the tops of the upright pieces in the sides of the body of a
railway-carriage and supporting the roof and roof-sticks. [Prob. conn. with
Dut. _kant_; Ger. _kante_, corner.]

CANT, kant, _n._ sale by auction.--_v.t._ to sell by auction. [O. Fr.
_encant_, auction; der. uncertain, cf. Low L. _incant[=a]re_, to put up to
auction.]

CANT, kant, _adj._ brisk: lively. [Scot.; der. unknown. See CANTY.]

CAN'T, känt, a colloquial contraction for CANNOT.

CANTAB, kan'tab, for CANTABRIGIAN, _adj._ of or pertaining to
Cambridge--Latinised _Cantabrigia_.

CANTABANK, kan'ta-bangk, _n._ a strolling singer. [It. _cantambanco_.]

CANTALOUP, kan'ta-loop, _n._ a small, ribbed variety of musk-melon.
[Fr.,--It. _Cantalupo_, a town near Rome, where it was first grown in
Europe.]

CANTANKEROUS, kan-tang'k[.e]r-us, _adj._ cross-grained: perverse in
temper.--_adv._ CANTAN'KEROUSLY.--_n._ CANTAN'KEROUSNESS. [M. E. _contak_,
quarrelling.]

CANTAR, kan'tär, _n._ a Turkish weight of 100 rotls or pounds.

CANTATA, kan-tä'ta, _n._ originally the name applied to a sort of musical
narrative by one person, accompanied by a single instrument; subsequently
an air was introduced--the modern concert-aria: now also a choral work,
either sacred, and similar to, but shorter than the oratorio, or secular,
either lyric or dramatic, but not intended for the stage.--_ns._ CANTA'TE,
the 98th Psalm, from its opening words in Latin, 'Cantate Domino;'
CAN'TATRICE, a female singer. [It.,--L. _cant[=a]re_, freq. of _can[)e]re_,
to sing.]

CANTEEN, kan-t[=e]n', _n._ a tin vessel used by soldiers for holding
liquors: a barrack-tavern, or refreshment-house for the use of the
soldiers. [Fr. _cantine_--It. _cantina_, a cellar; further der. uncertain.]

CANTER, kan't[.e]r, _n._ an easy gallop.--_v.i._ to move at an easy
gallop.--_v.t._ to make to canter. [Orig. _Canterbury-gallop_, from the
easy pace at which the pilgrims rode to the shrine at Canterbury.]

CANTERBURY, kan't[.e]r-ber-ri, _n._ a stand with divisions in it for
holding books, music, &c.--CANTERBURY BELLS (see CAMPANULA).

CANTHARIDES, kan-thar'i-d[=e]z, _n.pl._ Spanish flies, used for
blistering.--_adjs._ CANTHAR'IDAL, CANTHARID'IAN, CANTHARID'IC, composed of
cantharides.--_n._ CANTHAR'IDINE, the active principle of blistering-flies.
[L. _cantharis_, beetle, pl. _cantharides_.]

CANTHARUS, kan'tha-rus, _n._ a large two-handled drinking-cup: a laver in
the atrium before ancient churches;--_pl._ CAN'THAR[=I], [L.]

CANTHUS, kan'thus, _n._ the angle formed by the junction of the eyelids:
one of the upper and lower or anterior and posterior extremities of the
compound eyes of insects:--_pl._ CAN'THI (-th[=i]). [Gr. _kanthos_, corner
of the eye.]

CANTICLE, kan'ti-kl, _n._ a song: a non-metrical hymn, esp. one of those
used in the public services of the church, as the _Benedicite_: (_pl._) the
Song of Solomon.--_n._ CAN'TICUM, a canticle: a part-song in an ancient
play. [L. _canticulum_, dim of _canticum_.]

CANTILENA, kan-ti-l[=e]'na, _n._ a ballad or light song: a cantus firmus or
melody for church use: a singing exercise or solfeggio. [L.]

CANTILEVER, kan'ti-l[=e]v-[.e]r, _n._ a large bracket used in architecture
for supporting cornices, balconies, and even stairs--the principle has been
applied in the construction of bridges to support enormous weights.--Also
CAN'TALIVER. [Prob. made up of CANT, angle, and Fr. _lever_, to raise.]

CANTILLATE, kan'ti-l[=a]t, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to chant, intone.--_n._
CANTILL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CAN'TILLATORY.

CANTION, kan'shun, _n._ (_Spens._) a song.

CANTLE, kan'tl, _n._ a fragment or edge of anything: the protuberant part
of the back of a saddle: (_Scot._) the top of the head.--_v.t._ to cut a
piece from: to divide.--_ns._ CANT'LET, a fragment, cantle; CANT'LING, the
lower course of bricks enclosing a brick-clamp. [CANT, edge.]

CANTO, kan't[=o], _n._ division of a song or poem: the treble or leading
melody.--_n._ CAN'TOR, the leader of the singing in a church, a
precentor.--_adjs._ CANT[=O]'RIAL; CANT[=O]'RIS (gen. of L. _cantor_), of
or belonging to the cantor or precentor.--_n._ CAN'TUS, a melody, esp. an
ecclesiastical style of music.--CANTO FERMO, the simple melody of the hymns
and chants used in the Christian Church of the West from the earliest
times. [It.,--L. _cantus_--_can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CANTON, kan'tun, _n._ a division of territory, constituting in Switzerland
a separate government, in France a subdivision of an arrondissement:
(_her._) an ordinary of a shield, being a square occupying generally the
dexter, sometimes the sinister, chief of the field.--_v.t._ to divide into
cantons: to allot quarters to troops.--_adjs._ CAN'TONAL, pertaining to or
divided into cantons; CAN'TONED (_archit._), ornamented at the corners with
projecting pilasters: (_her._) placed in the midst of charges occupying the
corners.--_n._ CAN'TONMENT (also pronounced can-t[=oo]n'ment), the
temporary quarters of troops when taking part in manoeuvres or active
operations: in India, permanent military towns, distinct and at some little
distance from the principal cities. [O. Fr. _canton_; It. _cantone_,
corner, district--_canto_, a corner: cf. CANT (2).]

CANTOR. See under CANTO.

CANTRED, kan'tred, _n._ a division of the country: a hundred. [W.
_cantref_--_cant_, hundred, and _tref_, town.]

CANTRIP, kan'trip, _n._ a freak or wilful piece of trickery: a witch's
spell. [Scot.; ety. unknown; Jamieson suggested _cant_, to turn over,
_raip_, a roap.]

CANTUARIAN, kan-t[=u]-[=a]'ri-an, _adj._ pertaining to Canterbury as the
archiepiscopal see of the primate of the Church of England. [Low L.
_Cantuarius_, _Cantuarensis_--A.S. _Cantware_ (pl.), the people of Kent.]

CANTY, kan'ti, _adj._ cheerful, lively.--_n._ CAN'TINESS. [Scot.; cf. Low
Ger. _kantig_.]

CANVAS, kan'vas, _n._ a coarse cloth made of hemp, used for sails, tents,
&c., and for painting on: the sails of a ship.--_v.t._ to cover with
canvas.--_ns._ CAN'VAS-BACK, a North American duck, very good eating, its
back ashy white, crossed by broken, zigzag, dark lines; CAN'VAS-CLIMB'ER
(_Shak._), a sailor; CAN'VAS-STRETCH'ER, a wooden frame on which canvas is
stretched for oil-painting; CAN'VAS-WORK, embroidery upon cloth over which
canvas has been laid to guide the stitches: an embroidery in Berlin wool on
silk canvas with plush-stitch.--UNDER CANVAS, having the sails unfurled,
under sail: living in tents. [O. Fr. _canevas_--L. and Gr. _cannabis_,
hemp.]

CANVASS, kan'vas, _v.t._ to sift, examine: to discuss: to solicit votes,
contributions, &c.--_v.i._ to solicit votes, &c. (with _for_).--_n._ close
examination: a seeking or solicitation.--_n._ CAN'VASSER. [From CANVAS.]

CANY, k[=a]n'i, _adj._ (_Milton_) made of canes.

CANYON. Same as CAÑON.

CANZONE, kan-z[=o]'n[=a], _n._ a song or air in two or more parts, with
passages of fugue and imitation: a series of stanzas in Italian poetry, of
various metrical arrangements, and restricted to no set themes--(_dim._)
CANZONET', CANZONETTE'. [It., a song (Fr. _chanson_), L. _cantion-em_,
_can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CAOUTCHOUC, kow'chuk, _n._ the highly elastic juice or gum of a plant which
grows in South America and Asia: india-rubber. [Fr.--Carib. _cahuchu_.]

CAP, kap, _n._ a woman's head-dress of muslin, or the like: a boy's
head-dress, any kind of unbrimmed covering for the head: a cap-like
covering of any kind: a cover: the top.--_v.t._ to put on a cap, as the
official cap of a degree in some colleges: to outdo or surpass: to cover
the end or top: to raise the cap in token of respect:--_pr.p._ cap'ping;
_pa.p._ capped.--_n._ CAP'-CASE, a small travelling-case, a chest.--CAP AND
BELLS, the characteristic marks of a professional jester; CAP A STORY,
QUOTATION, VERSE, &c., to follow one up with another, or with its proper
continuation or conclusion; CAP IN HAND, symbolic of reverence or
submission; CAP OF LIBERTY, or _Phrygian bonnet_, the conical cap given to
a Roman slave on enfranchisement, now the symbol of republicanism; CAP OF
MAINTENANCE (see MAINTENANCE).--A FEATHER IN ONE'S CAP, something giving
distinction: something to be proud of.--BLACK CAP, that put on by the judge
before pronouncing sentence of death; COLLEGE CAP, the so-called square
mortarboard, or trencher-cap, worn at English colleges.--PERCUSSION CAP, a
small copper cylinder, closed at one end, for conveniently holding the
detonating powder which is exploded by the act of percussion in
percussion-arms.--SET ONE'S CAP AT, of a woman, to set herself to captivate
a man's fancy.--THE CAP FITS, the allusion hits or suits; THROW UP ONE'S
CAP, in token of immoderate joy. [A.S. _cæppe_--Low L. _cappa_, a cape or
cope.]

CAP, kap, _n._ a wooden drinking-bowl, with two handles. [Scot., prob. from
A.S. _copp_, a cup; prob. Scand. _koppr_.]

CAPA, kä'pa, _n._ a Spanish cloak: fine Cuban tobacco for the outsides of
cigars. [Sp.]

CAPABLE, k[=a]p'a-bl, _adj._ having ability, power, or skill to do:
qualified, competent.--_ns._ CAPABIL'ITY, CAP'ABLENESS. [Fr.,--Low L.
_capabilis_--L. _cap[)e]re_, to hold, take.]

CAPACITY, kap-as'i-ti, _n._ power of holding or grasping a thing: room:
volume: power of mind: character: position enabling one to do
something.--_adj._ CAP[=A]'CIOUS, including much: roomy: wide:
extensive.--_adv._ CAP[=A]'CIOUSLY.--_n._ CAP[=A]'CIOUSNESS.--_v.t._
CAPAC'ITATE, to make capable: to qualify; CAPACITY FOR HEAT, power of
absorbing heat.--LEGAL CAPACITY, the power to alter one's rights or duties
by the exercise of free-will, or responsibility to punishment for one's
acts. [Fr.,--L. _capacitas_,--_cap[)e]re_, to take, hold.]

CAP-À-PIE, kap-a-p[=e]', _adv._ from head to foot, referring to arming, as
a knight. [O. Fr. _cap a pie_ (mod. _de pied en cap_)--L. _caput_, head,
and _pes_, foot.]

CAPARISON, ka-par'is-un, _n._ the covering of a horse: a rich cloth laid
over a war-horse: dress and ornaments generally.--_v.t._ to cover with a
cloth, as a horse: to dress very richly.--_adj._ CAPAR'ISONED. [Fr.
_caparaçon_--Sp. _caparazon_, augmentative of _capa_, a cape, cover--Low L.
_cappa_.]

CAPE, k[=a]p, _n._ a covering for the shoulders attached as a tippet to a
coat or cloak: a sleeveless cloak. [O. Fr. _cape_--Low L. _cappa_.]

CAPE, k[=a]p, _n._ a head or point of land running into the sea: a
headland: a wine produced in Cape Colony.--_v.i._ (_naut._) to keep a
course.--THE CAPE, for the Cape Colony. [Fr. _cap_--L. _caput_, the head.]

CAPELIN, kap'e-lin, _n._ a small fish of the smelt family, extremely
abundant on the coasts of Newfoundland, and much used as bait in the
cod-fishery.--Also CAP'LIN. [Fr. and Sp. _capelan_.]

CAPELINE, kap'e-lin, _n._ a small iron skull-cap worn by archers in the
middle ages: a light woollen hood worn by ladies going out to an evening
party: a surgical bandage for the head.--Also CAP'ELLINE. [Fr.,--Low L.
_capella_--_capa_, a cap.]

CAPELLET, kap'e-let, _n._ a wen-like swelling on a horse's elbow, or on the
back part of his hock. [Fr.,--Low L. _capella_--_capa_, a cap.]

CAPELL-MEISTER. Same as KAPELLMEISTER (q.v.).

CAPER, k[=a]'p[.e]r, _n._ the pickled flower-bud of the caper-shrub, much
grown in Sicily. It has an agreeable pungency of taste, with a slight
bitterness, and is much used in sauces, along with boiled mutton, &c.--_n._
C[=A]'PER-TEA, a black tea with a knotty curled leaf. [L. and Gr.
_capparis_.]

CAPER, k[=a]'p[.e]r, _v.i._ to leap or skip like a goat: to dance in a
frolicsome manner.--_n._ a leap: a prank.--_n._ C[=A]'PERER, a dancer.--TO
CUT A CAPER, to dance or act fantastically. [See CAPRIOLE.]

CAPERCAILZIE, k[=a]-per-k[=a]l'yi, _n._ a species of grouse, almost equal
in size to a turkey, and the largest of the gallinaceous birds of
Europe.--Also CAPERCAIL'LIE. [Gael. _capull coilie_, large woodcock.]

CAPERNAITE, kap-er'na-[=i]t, _n._ a polemical term applied to a believer in
transubstantiation--from John, vi. 52.--_adj._ CAPERNAIT'IC.--_adv._
CAPERNAIT'ICALLY. [_Capernaum_, a town in Galilee.]

CAPERNOITIE, kap-er-noi'ti, _n._ (_Scot._) head, noddle.--_n._
CAPERNOI'TEDNESS.--_adjs._ CAPERNOI'TY, CAPERNOI'TED, peevish: crabbed.

CAPIAS, k[=a]'pi-as, _n._ a judicial writ, commanding the sheriff to arrest
the person named in it. [L. _capias_, thou mayst take--L. _cap[)e]re_, to
take.]

CAPIBARA. Same as CAPYBARA.

CAPILLAIRE, kap-il-l[=a]r', _n._ (_orig._) a syrup extracted from the
maiden-hair fern: a simple syrup flavoured with orange-flower water. [Fr.,
'maiden-hair'--L. _capillaris_. See CAPILLARY.]

CAPILLAMENT, ka-pil'a-ment, _n._ a filament or fine fibre. [L.
_capillamentum_--_capillus_, hair.]

CAPILLARY, kap'il-a-ri, or ka-pil'a-ri, _adj._ as fine or minute as a hair:
having a very small bore, as a tube.--_n._ a tube with a bore as fine as a
hair: (_pl._) the minute vessels that unite the veins and arteries in
animals.--_adj._ CAPILLACEOUS (kap-i-l[=a]'shi-us), hair-like,
capillary.--_n._ CAPILLAR'ITY, a name given to certain phenomena which
appear when open tubes, having a very small bore, are placed in vessels
containing liquids--e.g., if placed in water, the level of the water in the
tube will be above that of the general surface.--_adj._ CAP'ILLOSE, hairy.
[L. _capillaris_--_capillus_, hair, akin to _caput_, the head, akin to Eng.
HEAD.]

CAPITAL, kap'it-al, _adj._ relating to the head: involving the loss of the
head; chief: principal: excellent.--_n._ the head or top part of a column
or pillar: the chief or most important thing: the chief city of a country:
a large letter, such as used on title-pages, &c.: the stock or money for
carrying on any business.--_n._ CAPITALIS[=A]'TION, the act of converting
into capital: printing with capital letters.--_v.t._ CAP'ITAL[=I]SE, to
convert into capital or money.--_ns._ CAP'ITALISM, condition of possessing
capital: the economic system which generates capitalists; CAP'ITALIST, one
who has capital or money.--_adv._ CAP'ITALLY, chiefly: principally:
excellently: by capital punishment.--_adj._ CAP'ITATE (_bot._), growing in
or shaped like a head.--_ns._ CAPIT[=A]'TION, a numbering of every head or
individual: a tax on every head; CAPITE (kap'it-i), an ancient English
tenure (_Shak._).--CIRCULATING OR FLOATING CAPITAL consists of the wages
paid to the workmen, and of the raw material used up in the processes of
industry, &c.; FIXED CAPITAL consists of buildings, machines, tools,
&c.--HOLD LANDS IN CAPITE, to hold them directly from the sovereign.--MAKE
CAPITAL OUT OF, to turn to advantage. [O. Fr. _capitel_--L.
_capitalis_--_caput_, the head.]

CAPITAN, kap-i-tan', or kap'i-tan, _n._ the chief admiral of the Turkish
fleet.--_n._ CAPITAN'O, a head-man. [See CAPTAIN.]

CAPITOL, kap'it-ol, _n._ the temple of Jupiter at Rome, built on the
_Capitoline_ hill: (_U.S._) the house where Congress meets.--_adjs._
CAPIT[=O]'LIAN, CAPIT'OLINE. [L. _Capitolium_--_caput_, the head.]

CAPITULAR, kap-it'[=u]l-ar, _n._ a statute passed in a chapter or
ecclesiastical court: a member of a chapter--also CAPIT'ULARY.--_adj._
relating or belonging to a chapter in a cathedral.--_adv._ CAPIT'ULARLY.
[See CHAPTER.]

CAPITULATE, kap-it'[=u]l-[=a]t, _v.i._ to treat: to draw up terms of
agreement: to yield or surrender on certain conditions or heads.--_ns._
CAPIT'ULANT; CAPITUL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CAPIT'ULATORY, recapitulatory. [Low
L. _capitulatus_, pa.p. of _capitul[=a]re_, to arrange under
heads--_capitulum_, a chapter.]

CAPITULUM, ka-pit'[=u]-lum, _n._ (_bot._) a close head of sessile flowers,
as in COMPOSITÆ: (_anat._) the head of a bone, esp. of a rib--also
CAPITEL'LUM.--_adj._ CAPIT'ULAR. [L., dim. of _caput_, head.]

CAPLE, CAPUL, k[=a]'pl, _n._ a horse. [M. E. _capel_; cf. Ice. _kapall_;
Ir. _capall_; prob. from Low L. _caballus_, a horse.]

CAPNOMANCY, kap'no-man-si, _n._ divination by means of smoke. [Gr.
_kapnos_, smoke, _manteia_, divination.]

CAPOCCHIA, ka-pok'ia, _n._ (_Shak._) a fool. [It.]

CAPON, k[=a]'pn, _n._ a castrated cock: a fish: a letter.--_v.t._
C[=A]'PONISE. [A.S. _capun_; L. _capon-em_, Gr. _kap[=o]n_--_koptein_, to
cut. See CHOP.]

CAPONIERE, kap-[=o]-n[=e]r', _n._ a covered passage across the ditch of a
fortified place.--Also CAPONIER'. [Fr.]

CAPORAL, kap-or-al', _n._ a kind of shag tobacco. [Fr.]

CAPOT, ka-pot', _n._ the winning of all the tricks at the game of piquet,
and scoring forty.--_v.i._ to win all the tricks in piquet. [Fr.]

CAPOTE, ka-p[=o]t', _n._ a long kind of cloak or mantle. [Fr., dim. of
_cape_, a cloak.]

CAPPAGH-BROWN, kap'a-brown, _n._ a brown pigment yielded by a bituminous
earth from _Cappagh_ near Cork.--Also CAPP'AH-BROWN.

CAPRIC, kap'rik, _adj._ in CAPRIC ACID, a fatty acid obtained from butter,
&c., having a slightly goat-like smell.--_ns._ CAP'RIN, CAP'RINE, a
compound of capric acid and glycerine found in butter. [L. _caper_, a
goat.]

CAPRICE, ka-pr[=e]s', _n._ a change of humour or opinion without reason: a
freak: changeableness.--_ns._ CAPRICCIO (ka-pr[=e]t'cho), a sportive
motion: (_mus._) a species of free composition, not subject to rule as to
form or figure; CAPRICCIO'SO, a direction in music for a free
style.--_adj._ CAPRI'CIOUS (_Shak._), humorous: full of caprice:
changeable.--_adv._ CAPRI'CIOUSLY.--_n._ CAPRI'CIOUSNESS. [Fr.
_caprice_--It. _capriccio_; perh. from L. _capra_, a she-goat.]

CAPRICORN, kap'ri-korn, _n._ one of the twelve signs of the zodiac, like a
horned goat. [L. _capricornus_--_caper_, a goat, _cornu_, a horn.]

CAPRIFICATION, kap-ri-fi-k[=a]'shun, _n._ a method supposed to hasten the
ripening of figs, by puncturing.--_adj._ CAP'RIFORM, goat-shaped. [L.
_caprificus_, the wild fig--_caper_, a goat, and _ficus_, a fig.]

CAPRIN, CAPRINE. See CAPRIC.

CAPRINE, kap'rin, _adj._ like a goat.

CAPRIOLE, kap'ri-[=o]l, _n._ a caper: a leap without advancing.--_v.i._ to
leap: to caper. [O. Fr. _capriole_--It. _capriola_--L. _caper_, _capra_, a
goat.]

CAPSICUM, kap'si-kum, _n._ a tropical plant or shrub, from which cayenne
pepper is made.--_n._ CAP'SICINE, the active principle of capsicum. [From
L. _capsa_, a case, its berries being contained in pods or
capsules--_cap[)e]re_, to take, hold.]

CAPSIZE, kap-s[=i]z', _v.t._ to upset.--_v.i._ to be upset. [Ety. dub.;
Prof. Skeat suggests Sp. _cabezar_, to nod, pitch.]

CAPSTAN, kap'stan, _n._ an upright machine turned by spokes so as to wind
upon it a cable which draws something, generally the anchor, on board ship.
[Fr. _cabestan_, _capestan_, through Low L. forms from L. _cap[)e]re_, to
take, hold.]

CAPSULE, kap's[=u]l, _n._ the seed-vessel of a plant: a small
dish.--_adjs._ CAP'SULAR, CAP'SULARY, hollow like a capsule: pertaining to
a capsule; CAP'SULATE, -D, enclosed in a capsule. [Fr.,--L. _capsula_, dim.
of _capsa_, a case--_cap[)e]re_, to hold.]

CAPTAIN, kap't[=a]n, or kap'tin, _n._ a head or chief officer: the
commander of a troop of horse, a company of infantry, or a ship: the
overseer of a mine: the leader of a team or club: the head-boy of a
school.--_v.t._ to lead.--_ns._ CAP'TAINCY, the rank or commission of a
captain; CAP'TAIN-GEN'ERAL, chief commander of an army; CAP'TAINSHIP,
CAP'TAINRY (_obs._), rank or condition of a captain: skill in commanding.
[O. Fr. _capitaine_--Low L. _capitaneus_, chief--L. _caput_, head.]

CAPTION, kap'shun, _n._ the act of taking: an arrest: (_Eng. law_) the
formal title of indictments and depositions which shows the authority under
which it is executed or taken: in Scotland, prior to 1837, the name given
to the formal warrant to apprehend a debtor or other defaulting obligant,
which was given in the Bill Chamber after letters of horning had been
executed.--_adj._ CAP'TIOUS, ready to catch at faults or take offence:
critical: peevish.--_adv._ CAP'TIOUSLY.--_n._ CAP'TIOUSNESS. [L.
_captionem_--_cap[)e]re_, to take.]

CAPTIVATE, kap'tiv-[=a]t, _v.t._ to charm: to engage the
affections.--_adj._ CAP'TIV[=A]TING, having power to engage the affections.
[See CAPTIVE.]

CAPTIVE, kap'tiv, _n._ one taken: a prisoner of war: one kept in
bondage.--_adj._ taken, or kept prisoner in war; charmed or subdued by
anything.--_ns._ CAP'TIVAUNCE (_Spens._), captivity; CAPTIV'ITY; CAP'TOR,
one who takes a prisoner or a prize; CAP'TURE, the act of taking: the thing
taken: an arrest.--_v.t._ to take as a prize: to take by force. [L.
_captivus_--_cap[)e]re_, _captum_.]

CAPUCCIO, ka-p[=oo]ch'i-o, _n._ (_Spens._) a hood. [It.]

CAPUCHE, ka-p[=u]sh', _n._ a hood, esp. that worn by the _Capuchins_.--_n._
CAPUCHIN, (kap'[=u]-chin or kap-[=oo]-sh[=e]n'), a Franciscan monk, so
called from the hood he wears: a hooded pigeon. [Fr. _capucin_, It.
_cappucino_, a small cowl--Low L. _cappa_. See CAP, CAPE.]

CAPUL. See CAPLE.

CAPUT, käp'ut, _n._ a head.--CAPUT MORTUUM, the residuum after
distillation: worthless residue.

CAPYBARA, kap-i-bär'a, _n._ the largest of rodent quadrupeds, native to
South America, allied to the guinea-pig. [Brazilian.]

CAR (old form CARR), kär, _n._ a vehicle moved on wheels, applied to very
various forms--a large and splendid vehicle, as a triumphal car, a funeral
car, the two-wheeled Irish jaunting-car; in Birmingham, a four-wheeled cab,
as opposed to a hansom (cab); in America, applied to all vehicles for
railway travelling, as passenger-car, palace-car, freight-car, &c.; in
England, applied only to the carriages of street tramways: a railway
carriage: (_poet._) a chariot: the part of a balloon in which the aeronauts
sit.--_n._ CAR'MAN, a man who drives a car or cart: a carter. [O. Fr.
_car_--Low L. _carra_, _carrus_, itself a Celt. word, seen in Ir. _carr_,
Bret. _karr_.]

CARABINE. Sec CARBINE.

CARACAL, kar'a-kal, _n._ the Persian lynx. [Fr., prob. Turk. _qara_,
_qulaq_, black ear.]

CARACARA, kar-a-kar'a, _n._ a popular name for the South American
_Polyborinæ_, a sub-family of _Falconidæ_, resembling the vultures. [Imit.]

CARACK. See CARRACK.

CARACOLE, kar'a-k[=o]l, _n._ the half-turn or wheel made by a horseman: a
winding stair.--_v.i._ to turn half-round, as cavalry in wheeling: to
prance about.--_p.adj._ CAR'ACOLING. [Fr. _caracole_--It. _caracollo_--Sp.
_caracol_, the spiral shell of a snail.]

CARACT, kar'akt, _n._ mark: sign: character (q.v.).

CARAFE, ka-raf', _n._ a water-bottle for the table, [Fr. _carafe_, prob.
from Ar. _gharafa_, to draw water.]

CARAMBOLA, ka-ram'b[=o]-la, _n._ the acrid pulpy fruit of a small East
Indian tree, used for tarts, &c.: the tree itself.

CARAMBOLE. See CAROM.

CARAMEL, kar'a-mel, _n._ a dark-brown substance produced by the action of
heat on sugar, used in colouring whisky, wines, &c.: a kind of confection,
usually of chocolate, sugar, and butter.--Also CAR'OMEL. [Fr.--Sp.
_caramelo_; further origin dubious.]

CARAPA, kar'a-pa, _n._ a genus of tropical trees of natural order
_Meliaceæ_, a South American species yielding the useful carap-oil or
crab-oil. [_Caraipi_, the native Guiana name.]

CARAPACE, kar'a-p[=a]s, _n._ the shell of the crab, tortoise, &c.--_adj._
CARAP[=A]'CIAL. [Fr.--Sp. _carapacho_.]

CARAT, kar'at, _n._ a weight of 4 grains: a proportional measure of 1/24 in
stating the fineness of gold. [Fr.,--Ar. _q[=i]r[=a]t_, perh. from Gr.
_keration_, a seed or bean used as a weight.]

CARAUNA, ka-raw'na, _n._ an aromatic resinous substance yielded by a tree
on the Amazon, formerly used in plasters.--Also CARAN'NA.

CARAVAN, kar'a-van, _n._ a company of travellers associated together for
security in crossing the deserts in the East: a company of people: a large
close carriage, or any kind of house on wheels.--_ns._ CARAVANEER', the
leader of a caravan; CARAVAN'SARY, CARAVAN'SERA, a kind of unfurnished inn
where caravans stop. [Pers. _k[=a]rw[=a]nsar[=a][=i]_--_k[=a]rw[=a]n_,
caravan, _sar[=a]i_, inn.]

CARAVEL, kar'av-el, _n._ a kind of light sailing-vessel. [Fr.,--It.
_caravelia_; cf. Low L. _carabus_, Gr. _karabos_, a bark.]

CARAWAY, kar'a-w[=a], _n._ a plant with aromatic seeds, used as a tonic and
condiment.--_n._ CAR'AWAY-SEED. [Prob. through Sp. from Ar. _karwiy[=a]_;
cf. Gr. _karon_.]

CARBAZOTIC, kar-b[=a]-zot'ik, _adj._ consisting of carbon and azote.

CARBIDE. See CARBON.

CARBINE, kär'b[=i]n, _n._ a short light musket--also CAR'ABINE.--_ns._
CARBINEER', CARABINEER', a soldier armed with a carbine. [Fr. _carabine_,
O. Fr. _calabrin_, a carbineer--_calabre_, a machine for casting
stones--Low L. _chadabula_, Gr. _katabol[=e]_, overthrow. Thus Diez; Littré
thinks _calabrin_ from Calabrian.]

CARBOLIC ACID, kar-bol'ik as'id, _n._ an acid produced from coal-tar, used
as a disinfectant. [L. _carbo_, coal.]

CARBON, kär'bon, _n._ an elementary substance, widely diffused, of which
pure charcoal is an example.--_n._ CAR'BIDE, a compound of carbon with a
metal, formerly called CAR'BURET.--_adjs._ CARBON[=A]'CEOUS, CARBON'IC,
pertaining to or composed of carbon.--_n._ CAR'BONATE, a salt formed by the
union of carbonic acid with a base.--_adjs._ CAR'BONATED, combined or
impregnated with carbonic acid; CARBONIF'EROUS, producing carbon or
coal.--_n._ CARBONIS[=A]'TION--_v.t._ CAR'BONISE, to make into
carbon.--CARBONIC ACID, an acid formed of carbon and oxygen, generally
gaseous, and evolved by respiration and combustion. [Fr. _carbone_--L.
_carbon-em_, coal.]

CARBONADO, kär-bon-[=a]'do, _n._ (_obs._) a piece of meat cut crossways for
broiling on coals.--_v.t._ to cut crossways for broiling: to slash. [Sp.
_carbonada_.]

CARBONARI, kär-bon-är'i, _n.pl._ members of a secret society in Italy at
the beginning of this century, founded to help forward a republican
government.--_n._ CARBONAR'ISM. [It., lit. 'charcoal burners.']

CARBOY, kar'boi, _n._ a large bottle of green or blue glass, protected with
a frame of basket-work or wood, used for holding sulphuric acid or the
like. [Pers. _qar[=a]bah_.]

CARBUNCLE, kär'bung-kl, _n._ a fiery-red precious stone: an inflamed ulcer:
a pimple on the nose.--_adjs._ CAR'BUNCLED, set with the gem carbuncle;
afflicted with carbuncles: having red inflamed spots; CARBUN'CULAR,
belonging to or like a carbuncle: red: inflamed. [L. _carbunculus_, dim. of
_carbo_, a coal.]

CARBURET, same as CARBIDE (q.v. under CARBON).--_adj._ CAR'BURETTED.--_n._
CARBURET'TER, or CARBURET'TOR, an apparatus for charging gases with carbon.

CARCAJOU, kär'ka-j[=oo], _n._ the American wolverine.

CARCAKE, kar'k[=a]k, _n._ a kind of cake for Shrove Tuesday. [Scot.--A.S.
_caru_, grief, and CAKE.]

CARCANET, kär'ka-net, _n._ a collar of jewels. [_Carcan_, an obsolete word
for an iron collar used for punishment--Low L. _carcannum_, from Teut.]

CARCASS, CARCASE, kär'kas, _n._ a dead body or corpse, no longer used of
the human body: the framework of anything: a ruin: a kind of bombshell.
[Fr. _carcasse_, a skeleton (It. _carcasso_, a quiver), prob. from Late Gr.
_tarkasion_, which is perh. the Pers. _tarkash_, a quiver.]

CARCINOLOGY, kär-si-nol'[=o]-ji, _n._ that department of zoology which
treats of crabs and other crustaceans.--_adj._ CARCINOLOG'ICAL.--_n._
CARCINOL'OGIST. [Gr. _karkinos_, a crab, _logia-legein_, to speak.]

CARCINOMA, kar-si-n[=o]ma, _n._ a cancer (see CANCER).--_adj._
CARCIN[=O]'MATOUS.--_n._ CARCIN[=O]'SIS, the growth and development of
cancer. [Gr.]

CARD, kärd, _n._ a piece of pasteboard marked with figures for playing a
game, or with a person's address upon it: a note.--_ns._ CARD'-BOARD, a
stiff, finely finished pasteboard; CARD'-CASE, a case for carrying
visiting-cards; CARD'-SHARP'ER, one who cheats at cards; CARD'-T[=A]'BLE, a
table for playing cards on.--A KNOWING CARD (_slang_), one who is wide
awake; A SURE CARD, an undertaking which will be sure to succeed.--HAVE THE
CARDS IN ONE'S HANDS, to have everything under one's control; HOUSE OF
CARDS, something flimsy or unsubstantial; ON THE CARDS, likely to turn up;
PLAY ONE'S CARDS WELL, or BADLY, to make, or not to make, the best of one's
chances; SHOW ONE'S CARDS, to expose one's secrets or designs; SPEAK BY THE
CARD, to speak with elegance and to the point; THROW UP THE CARDS, to give
in: to confess defeat. [Fr. _carte_--L. _charta_, Gr. _chart[=e]s_, paper.
CARTE is a doublet.]

CARD, kärd, _n._ an instrument for combing wool or flax.--_v.t._ to comb
wool, &c.--_n._ CARD'ER, one who has to do with carding wool. [Fr.
_carde_--L. _carduus_, a thistle.]

CARDAMINE, kär'da-m[=i]n, _n._ a genus of cress, including the
cuckoo-flower or lady's smock, &c. [Gr. _kardamin[=e]_--_kardamon_, cress.]

CARDAMOM, kär'da-mom, _n._ the capsules of certain tropical plants, which
form an aromatic, pungent spice. [L. _cardamomum_--Gr. _kardam[=o]mon_.]

CARDECU, kar'de-k[=u], _n._ (_obs._) an old French silver coin. [Fr. _quart
d'écu_, quarter of a crown.]

CARDIAC, kär'di-ak, _adj._ belonging to the heart: cordial, reviving--also
CARDIAC'AL.--_ns._ CAR'DIAC, a disease of the heart: a cordial; CAR'DIALGY,
CARDIAL'GIA, an uneasy sensation or burning pain at the upper orifice of
the stomach, apparently at the heart--hence called heartburn; CAR'DIOGRAPH,
an apparatus for recording by a tracing--CAR'DIOGRAM--the movements of the
heart; CAR'DIOID, a geometrical curve, so called from its heart-like form;
CARD[=I]T'IS, inflammation of the heart. [L.--Gr. _kardiakos_--_kardia_,
the heart.]

CARDIGAN, kar'de-gan, _n._ a knitted woollen jacket, named from the Crimean
hero, the Earl of _Cardigan_ (1797-1868).

CARDINAL, kär'din-al, _adj._ denoting that on which a thing hinges or
depends: principal; of a deep scarlet colour, like a cardinal's
cassock.--_n._ one of the seventy princes of the church constituting the
sacred college at Rome, to whom pertains the right of electing a new pope:
a short cloak, formerly worn by ladies.--_ns._ CAR'DINALATE, CAR'DINALSHIP,
the office or dignity of a cardinal; CAR'DINAL-BIRD, a species of grosbeak,
one of the finest song-birds of America, probably so called from its red
plumage.--_adv._ CAR'DINALLY, fundamentally: (_Shak._, _Measure for
Measure_, II. i. 81) carnally.--CARDINAL FLOWER (see LOBELIA); CARDINAL
NUMBERS, numbers expressing how many; CARDINAL POINTS, the four chief
points of the compass--north, south, east, and west; CARDINAL VIRTUES,
justice, prudence, temperance, fortitude, so called because the whole of
human nature was supposed to hinge or turn upon them--the _natural_ as
distinguished from the _theological_ virtues. [Fr.--L.
_cardinalis_--_cardo_, _cardinis_, a hinge.]

CARDOON, kar-d[=oo]n', _n._ a perennial plant, the prickly artichoke of the
Mediterranean region.--Also CHARDOON'. [O. Fr.,--L. _carduus_, a thistle.]

CARDUUS, kar'd[=u]-us, _n._ (_Shak._) a thistle.--_n._ CARD[=O]'PHAGUS, a
thistle-eater, a donkey. [L.,--Gr. _kardos_, thistle; _phagos_, eater.]

CARE, k[=a]r, _n._ anxiety, heedfulness: charge, oversight: the object of
anxiety.--_v.i._ to be anxious: to be inclined: to have regard.--_adjs._
CARE'-CRAZED (_Shak._), crazed or broken with care and solicitude;
CARE'FUL, full of care: heedful: (_B._) anxious: (_Spens._)
dreadful.--_adv._ CARE'FULLY.--_n._ CARE'FULNESS.--_adj._ CARE'LESS,
without care: heedless, unconcerned.--_ns._ CARE'LESSNESS; CARE'-TAK'ER,
one put in charge of anything, esp. of an Irish farm from which a tenant
has been evicted.--_adj._ CARE'WORN, worn or vexed with care.--TAKE CARE,
to be careful or cautious; TAKE CARE OF, to look after with care. [A.S.
_caru_; Goth. _kara_, sorrow; Ice. _kæra_, to lament; Celt. _car_, care;
allied to L. _carus_, dear.]

CAREEN, ka-r[=e]n', _v.t._ to lay a ship on her side to repair her bottom
and keel.--_v.i._ of a ship, to move with an inclination to one side.--_n._
the position of a ship laid on one side.--_n._ CAREEN'AGE, a place where
ships are careened: the cost of careening. [Fr. _carène_--L. _carina_, the
bottom of a ship, the keel.]

CAREER, ka-r[=e]r', _n._ a racecourse: a race: course of action: manner of
life; _v.i._ to gallop: to move or run rapidly. [Fr. _carrière_, a
racecourse. See CAR.]

CARÊME, kar-[=a]m', _n._ Lent. [Fr.]

CARESS, ka-res', _v.t._ to treat with affection: to fondle: to
embrace.--_n._ any act or expression of affection. [Fr. _caresser_--It.
_carezza_, an endearment; Low L. _caritia_--L. _carus_, dear.]

CARET, k[=a]'ret, _n._ a mark, ^, used in writing when a word is left out.
[L. _caret_, there is wanting.]

CAREX, k[=a]'reks, _n._ a genus of plants including the sedges. [L.
_carex_, reed-grass, sedge.]

CARFAX, -FOX, kär'faks, -foks, _n._ a place where four roads meet--now used
only of particular examples, as at Oxford. [Fr.--L. _quadrifurc-us_,
four-forked.]

CARGO, kär'go, _n._ what a ship carries: its load. [Sp., from root of CAR.]

CARGOOSE, kar'g[=oo]s, _n._ the crested grebe. [Scand.; Ice. _kjarr_, copse
wood, and GOOSE.]

CARIACOU, kar'i-a-k[=oo], _n._ the Virginian deer of North America.--Also
CAR'JACOU.

CARIAMA, kär-i-ä'ma, _n._ a South American bird of prey of large size.
[Braz. _cariama_.]

CARIB, kar'ib, _n._ one of a native race inhabiting parts of Central
America and the north of South America--also CAR'IBBEE.--_adj._
CARIBB[=E]'AN.

CARIBOU, kar-i-b[=oo]', _n._ the American reindeer. [Can.Fr.]

CARICATURE, kar'i-ka-t[=u]r, _n._ a likeness of anything so exaggerated or
distorted as to appear ridiculous.--_v.t._ to turn into ridicule by
overdoing a likeness: to burlesque. Formerly spelt CARICAT[=U]'RA.--_n._
CARICATUR'IST, one who caricatures. [It. _caricatura_--_carricare_, to
load, from root of CAR.]

CARIES, k[=a]'ri-[=e]z, _n._ rottenness or decay of a bone.--_adj._
C[=A]'RIOUS, decayed. [L.]

CARILLON, kar'il-yong, _n._ a suite of musical bells for playing tunes: the
melody played on these. [Fr.,--Low L. _quadrilion-em_, a quaternary,
because carillons were formerly rung on four bells.]

CARINATE, kar'i-n[=a]t, _p.adj._ keel-shaped: having a prominence on the
outer surface. [L. _carinatus_--_carina_, a keel.]

CARIOLE, CARRIOLE, kar'i-[=o]l, _n._ a small open carriage: a light cart.
[Fr. _carriole_--root of CAR.]

CARK, kärk, _n._ (_arch._) care, anxiety, or solicitude.--_v.t._ to burden,
harass.--_v.i._ to be anxious.--_adj._ CARK'ING, distressing, causing
anxiety. [A.S. _cearig_, careful, anxious--_caru_, _cearu_, care. See
CARE.]

CARL, kärl, _n._ a husbandman, a clown: a churl: (_Scot._) a
niggard.--_ns._ CAR'LINE, an old woman: a witch; CAR'LOT (_Shak._), a
churl, peasant. [Scand., Ice. _karl_, a man, a male. See CHURL.]

CARLINE, kar'lin, _n._ a genus of plants closely allied to the true
thistles. [From a legend that an angel showed the root of one to
_Charlemagne_ as a remedy for a plague.]

CARLIST, kar'list, _n._ a supporter of the claims of the Spanish pretender
Don _Carlos_ de Bourbon (1788-1855), second son of Charles IV., and his
representatives, as against Queen Isabella, daughter of Ferdinand VII., and
her descendants.--_n._ CAR'LISM, devotion to the Carlist cause.

CARLOCK, kar'lok, _n._ a Russian isinglass obtained from the bladder of the
sturgeon. [Russ.]

CARLOVINGIAN, kär-lo-vin'ji-an, _adj._ relating to a dynasty of Frankish
kings, so called from _Carl_ the Great or Charlemagne (742-814).

CARLYLESE, kar-l[=i]l'[=e]z, _n._ the vigorous, irregular,
hypermetaphorical literary style and phraseology peculiar to Thomas
_Carlyle_ (1795-1881).--_adjs._ CARLYL'ESQUE, CARLYL'[=E]AN.--_n._
CARLYL'ISM.

CARMAGNOLE, kar'man-y[=o]l, _n._ a. popular song and dance of the French
Revolution: a kind of jacket worn by revolutionists at that time, with
short skirts, a broad collar and lapels, and several rows of buttons.
[Prob. from _Carmagnola_ in Piedmont.]

CARMELITE, kär'mel-[=i]t, _n._ a monk of the order of Our Lady of Mount
_Carmel_, in Syria, founded there about 1156, made a mendicant order in
1247--the habit brown, with white cloak and scapular, hence the Carmelites
were popularly known as the White Friars: a monk or nun of discalced or
reformed branch established by St Teresa--the barefooted Carmelites: a
variety of pear; a fine woollen stuff like beige.

CARMINATIVE, kar-min'a-tiv, _adj._ a medicine to relieve flatulence and
pain in the bowels, such as cardamoms, peppermint, ginger, and other
stimulating aromatics. [L. _carmin[=a]re_, to card--_carmen_, a card for
wool.]

CARMINE, kär'm[=i]n, _n._ the red colouring principle obtained from the
cochineal insect. [Fr. or Sp. _carmin_--Sp. _carmesí_, crimson--Ar.
_qirmazi_, crimson. Same root as CRIMSON.]

CARNAGE, kär'n[=a]j, _n._ (_obs._) a heap of slain: slaughter. [Fr.,--It.
_carnaggio_, carnage--L. _caro_, _carnis_, flesh.]

CARNAL, kär'nal, _adj._ fleshly: sensual: unspiritual: (_Shak._) murderous,
flesh-eating.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to convert into flesh, to become
fleshy.--_v.t._ CAR'NALISE, to make carnal: to debase carnally:--_pr.p._
cär'nal[=i]sing; _pa.p._ cär'nal[=i]sed.--_ns._ CAR'NALIST, a sensualist: a
worldling; CARNAL'ITY state of being carnal.--_adv._ CAR'NALLY,--_adjs._
CAR'NAL-MIND'ED, worldly-minded; CAR'NEOUS, CARNOSE', fleshy: of or like
flesh.--_n._ CAR'NIFEX, executioner.--_adj._ CARNIFIC'IAL.--_n._
CARNOS'ITY, a fleshy excrescence growing in and obstructing any part of the
body. [L. _carnalis_--_caro_, _carnis_, flesh.]

CARNALLITE, kär'nal-[=i]t, _n._ a milk-white or pinkish hydrous chloride of
potassium and magnesium found in the salt-mines of Stassfurt in Prussia.
[Named from the mineralogist Von _Carnall_ (1804-74).]

CARNATION, kar-n[=a]'shun, _n._ flesh-colour: one of the finest of
florists' flowers, a double-flowering variety of the clove pink, and
existing only in a state of cultivation.--_adj._ CARN[=A]'TIONED, having a
flesh-like colour. [L. _carnatio_, fleshiness.]

CARNAUBA, kär-nä-[=oo]'ba, _n._ a Brazilian palm yielding a yellowish wax:
the wax--also _Brazilian wax_. [Braz.]

CARNELIAN, kar-n[=e]'li-an, _n._ the name given to the finer varieties of
chalcedony, blood-red or flesh-colour, reddish-brown, reddish-white, or
yellow, more rarely milk-white.--Also CORN[=E]'LIAN.

CARNIVAL, kär'ni-val, _n._ a feast observed by Roman Catholics just before
the fast of Lent: any season of revelry or indulgence: riotous feasting,
merriment, or amusement. [It. _carnevale_--Low L. _carnelevarium_,
apparently from L. _carnem levare_, to put away flesh.]

CARNIVORA, kar-niv'[=o]-ra, _n.pl._ order of flesh-eating animals.--_n._
CAR'NIVORE, a carnivorous animal.--_adj._ CARNIV'OROUS,
flesh-eating.--_adv._ CARNIV'OROUSLY.--_n._ CARNIV'OROUSNESS. [L. _caro_,
_carnis_, flesh, _vorus_, devouring.]

CARNY, CARNEY, kär'ni, _v.t._ (_prov._) to coax, wheedle.--_v.i._ to act in
such a way.--_n._ flattery.

CAROB, kar'ob, _n._ the algaroba or locust-tree, a tree of the order
_Leguminosæ_, native to the Mediterranean countries. [Through Fr. from Ar.
_kharr[=u]bah_.]

CAROCHE, ka-r[=o]sh', _n._ a coach or carriage. [Fr.,--It. _caraccio_,
_carro_--L. _carrus_, car.]

CAROL, kar'ol, _n._ a song of joy or praise.--_v.i._ to sing a carol: to
sing or warble.--_v.t._ to praise or celebrate in song:--_pr.p._
car'olling; _pa.p._ car'olled.--_n._ CAR'OLLING, the act of the verb to
carol. [O. Fr. _carole_; It. _carola_, orig. a ring-dance; acc. to Diez, a
dim. of L. _chorus_.]

CAROLINGIAN, kar-[=o]-lin'ji-an, _adj._ Same as CARLOVINGIAN (q.v.).

CAROLUS, kar'ol-us, _n._ a gold coin of the time of Charles I.--_adj._
CAR'OLINE, belonging to the time of Charles. [L. _Carolus_, Charles.]

CAROM, kar'om, _n._ an abbreviation for CARAMBOLE, the same as CANNON in
billiards.

CAROTID, ka-rot'id, _adj._ relating to the two great arteries of the neck.
[Gr. _kar[=o]tides_--_karos_, sleep, the ancients supposing that deep sleep
was caused by compression of them.]

CAROUSE, kar-owz', _n._ a drinking-bout: a noisy revel.--_v.i._ to hold a
drinking-bout: to drink freely and noisily.--_ns._ CAROUS'AL, a carouse: a
feast; CAROUS'ER, one who carouses.--_adv._ CAROUS'INGLY. [O. Fr. _carous_,
Fr. _carrousse_--Ger. _gar aus_, quite out!--that is, empty the glass.]

CAROUSEL, kar-[=oo]'zel, _n._ a tilting match or tournament, to which were
added games, shows, and allegorical representations. [Fr.]

CARP, kärp, _v.i._ to catch at small faults or errors (with _at_).--_ns._
CARP'ER, one who carps or cavils; CARP'ING, cavilling:
fault-finding.--_adv._ CARP'INGLY. [Most prob. Scand., Ice. _karpa_, to
boast, modified in meaning through likeness to L. _carp[)e]re_, to pluck,
deride.]

CARP, kärp, _n._ a fresh-water fish common in ponds. [O. Fr. _carpe_--Low
L. _carpa_, prob. Teut.]

CARPAL, kär'pal, _adj._ pertaining to the wrist. [Gr. _karpos_, the wrist.]

CARPEL, kär'pel, _n._ a modified leaf forming the whole or part of the
pistil of a flower.--_adj._ CAR'PELLARY. [Gr. _karpos_, fruit.]

CARPENTER, kär'pent-[.e]r, _n._ a worker in timber as used in building
houses, ships, &c.--_v.i._ to do the work of a carpenter.--_ns._
CAR'PENTER-BEE, a bee that excavates its nest in wood; CAR'PENTRY, the
trade or work of a carpenter, [O. Fr. _carpentier_--Low L.
_carpentarius_--_carpentum_, a car, from root of CAR.]

CARPET, kär'pet, _n._ the woven or felted covering of floors, stairs,
&c.--_v.t._ to cover with a carpet:--_pr.p._ car'peting; _pa.p._
car'peted.--_ns._ CAR'PET-BAG, a travelling-bag, so called because usually
made of carpeting; CAR'PET-BAG'GER, one who comes to a place for political
or other ends, carrying his whole property qualification for citizenship
with him in his carpet-bag; CAR'PET-BEAT'ING, the removing of dust from
carpets by beating; CAR'PET-BED'DING, a system of horticulture in which
plants are arranged in mosaic or geometrical designs; CAR'PETING, material
of which carpets are made: carpets in general; CAR'PET-KNIGHT, one dubbed a
knight by mere court favour, not on account of his military exploits--hence
an effeminate person; CAR'PET-MONG'ER (_Shak._), an effeminate person;
CAR'PET-ROD, one of the narrow rods used to keep a stair carpet in its
place.--ON THE CARPET, under discussion. [O. Fr. _carpite_ (Fr.
_carpette_)--Low L. _carpeta_, a coarse fabric made from rags pulled to
pieces--L. _carp[)e]re_, to pluck.]

CARPOLITE, kär'po-l[=i]t, _n._ fruit petrified or converted into
stone.--_n._ CARPOL'OGY, the part of botany which treats of the structure
of fruits and seeds. [Gr. _karpos_, fruit, _lithos_, a stone, _logos_, a
discourse.]

CARRACK, kar'rak, _n._ a large ship of burden, which is also fitted for
fighting.--Also CAR'ACK. [O. Fr. _carraque_--Low L. _carraca_. Ety. dub.]

CARRAGEEN, kar-ra-g[=e]n', _n._ Carrageen moss, or Irish moss--marine alga,
common on the British coasts, used for making a highly digestible soup and
a kind of blanc-mange, as well as size. [From _Carragheen_, near Waterford
in Ireland, where it is found abundantly.]

CARRAT. Same as CARAT.

CARRAWAY. Same as CARAWAY.

CARRIAGE, kar'ij, _n._ act or cost of carrying: a vehicle for carrying:
behaviour: bearing: (_Shak._) burden: (_B._) baggage.--_adj._
_Carr'iageable_, that may be conveyed in carriages.--_ns._
CARR'IAGE-COM'PANY, or -PEO'PLE, people who keep their carriages;
CARR'IAGE-DRIVE, a road for carriages through parks, &c.; CARR'IAGE-HORSE,
a horse that draws a carriage.--CARRIAGE AND PAIR, a turn-out of a carriage
and two horses; CARRIAGE FREE, tree of charge for carrying. [See CARRY.]

[Illustration]

CARRICK-BEND, kar'ik-bend, _n._ (_naut._), a kind of knot, formed on a
bight by putting the end of a rope over its standing part, and then passing
it. [Perh. conn. with CARRACK, and the root of BIND.]

CARRIOLE. See CARIOLE.

CARRION, kar'i-un, _n._ the dead and putrid body or flesh of any animal:
anything vile.--_adj._ relating to, or feeding on, putrid flesh.--_n._
CARR'ION-CROW, a species of crow which feeds on carrion, small animals, &c.
[Fr. _carogne_--Low L. _caronia_--L. _caro_, _carnis_, flesh.]

CARRITCH, kar'itch, _n._ (_Scot._) a corrupted form of the word
_catechism_.--_n._ CARR'IWITCHET, a quibble.

CARRONADE, kar-un-[=a]d', _n._ a short cannon of large bore, first made at
_Carron_ in Scotland.

CARRON-OIL, kar'on-oil, _n._ a liniment composed of linseed-oil and
lime-water. [From its use for burns at _Carron_ Ironworks in
Stirlingshire.]

CARROT, kar'ut, _n._ a genus of _Umbelliferæ_, having a tapering root of a
reddish or yellowish colour: the root itself, which is edible and
sweet.--_adj._ CARR'OTY, carrot-coloured, applied to the hair. [Fr.
_carotte_--L. _carota_.]

CARRY, kar'i, _v.t._ to convey or bear: to lead or transport: to take by
force: to effect: to behave or demean: (of money) to be sufficient for a
certain purpose: to gain the election of a candidate: to get a bill passed
by a majority.--_v.i._ (of a gun, &c.) to reach, indicating the range of
its shot:--_pr.p._ carr'ying; _pa.p._ carr'ied.--_n._ the distance a
golf-ball goes when struck till it touches the ground: range: the portage
of a boat: land across which a boat has to be carried between one navigable
stream and another: the position of 'carry arms,' &c.: (_prov._) the sky,
cloud-drift.--_ns._ CARR'IER, one who carries, esp. for hire; CARR'Y-ALL, a
light, four-wheeled, one-horsed carriage; CARR'YING, the act of one who
carries; CARR'Y-TALE (_Shak._), a tale-bearer.--CARRY ALL BEFORE ONE, to
bear down all obstacles; CARRY AWAY, to carry off: to excite the feelings:
to transport; CARRY OFF, to cause the death of: to gain, to win, as a
prize: to cause to pass muster, to make to pass by assurance or
dissimulation; CARRY ON, to promote: to continue: to behave in a certain
fashion (a term of mild reprobation); CARRY ONE'S POINT, to overrule
objections in favour of one's plan; CARRY OUT, to accomplish fully: to
carry out for burial; CARRY OUT ONE'S BAT (_cricket_), to leave the wickets
without having been put out; CARRY OVER, to induce to join the other party;
CARRY THE DAY, or CARRY IT, to be successful: to win the day; CARRY
THROUGH, to succeed in accomplishing; CARRY TOO FAR, to exceed reasonable
limits; CARRY UP, to continue a building to a certain height: to trace
back; CARRY WEIGHT, to possess authority: to have force.--BE CARRIED, to be
highly excited: to have the head turned. [O. Fr. _carier_,--Low L.
_carric[=a]re_, to cart--L. _carrus_, a car.]

CARSE, kärs, _n._ in Scotland, a stretch of alluvial land along the banks
of some rivers. [_Scot._; perh. from an obsolete word _car_, a fen; cf.
Dan. _kjær_.]

CART, kärt, _n._ a two-wheeled vehicle without springs, used for farm
purposes, and for conveying heavy loads.--_v.t._ to convey in a cart: to
carry publicly in a cart as a punishment--formerly done to bawds.--_ns._
CART'AGE, the act or cost of carting; CART'ER, one who drives a cart;
CART'-HORSE, a horse used for drawing a cart; CART'-HOUSE, a shed for
keeping carts; CART'-LOAD, as much as a cart can carry; CART'S-TAIL, the
hind part of a cart; CART'WAY, a road or way by which carts may pass;
CART'WRIGHT, a carpenter who makes carts; T'-CART, a four-wheeled open
phaeton, seated for four, its ground-plan resembling a T--see also
DOG-CART, MAIL-CART, TAX-CART, &c.--PUT THE CART BEFORE THE HORSE, to
reverse the natural order of things.--VILLAGE CART, an uncovered
two-wheeled carriage for one horse, with a low body and one seat;
WHITECHAPEL CART, or CHAPEL CART, a light two-wheeled spring-cart much used
by butchers in delivering goods to their customers. [Ety. uncertain; from
A.S. _cræt_, or Ice. _kartr_.]

CARTE, kärt, _n._ the fourth position of the wrist in fencing. [Fr.
_quart_--L. _quartus_, fourth.]

CARTE, kärt, _n._ a bill of fare: (_Scot._), a playing-card: short for
_carte-de-visite_.--_ns._ CARTE-BLANCHE', a blank paper, duly signed, and
given to a person, to be filled up at his pleasure; CARTE-DE-VISITE', a
small photographic portrait pasted on a card; CART'EL, a challenge: an
agreement for exchange of prisoners; a card with writing on it.--HAVE
CARTE-BLANCHE, to have a commission to act with full discretionary powers.
[Fr.,--L. _charta_. See CARD.]

CARTESIAN, kar-t[=e]'zhi-an, _adj._ relating to the French philosopher René
_Descartes_ (1596-1650), or his philosophy.--CARTESIAN DEVIL, DIVER, or
BOTTLE-IMP, a scientific toy named after Descartes, illustrating the
principle of specific gravity.

CARTHAMINE, kär'tha-min, _n._ a dye obtained in crystals by a chemical
process from safflower. [Low L. _carthamus_--Ar. _qartum_, saffron.]

CARTHUSIAN, kar-th[=u]'zi-an, _n._ one of an order of monks founded by St
Bruno in 1086, noted for their strictness: a scholar of the Charterhouse
School.--_adj._ of or pertaining to the order. [L.
_Cartusianus_--_Catorissium_, _Chatrousse_, a village in Dauphiné, near
which their first monastery was founded.]

CARTILAGE, kär'ti-l[=a]j, _n._ in vertebrate animals, a firm elastic
substance, of a pearly whiteness, presenting to the unaided eye a uniform
and homogeneous appearance: gristle.--_adj._ CARTILAGI'NOUS, pertaining to
or consisting of cartilage, gristly. [Fr.,--L. _cartilago_; cog. with
_crates_, Gr. _kartalos_.]

CARTOGRAPHY, kar-tog'ra-fi, _n._ the art of preparing charts or maps. [L.
_charta_, chart, map, and Gr. _graphia_, _graph-ein_, to write.]

CARTOMANCY, kär't[=o]-man-si, _n._ a divination by playing-cards. [Low L.
_carta_, a card, Gr. _manteia_, divination.]

CARTON, kär'ton, _n._ a thin pasteboard, a box made from such: a small disc
within the bull's-eye of the target, a shot that strikes this.--_ns._
CAR'TONNAGE, pasteboard: the outer covering of a mummy; CAR'TON-PIERRE',
statuary pasteboard, a kind of papier-maché. [Fr. See CARTOON.]

CARTOON, kär-t[=oo]n', _n._ a preparatory drawing on strong paper to be
transferred to frescoes, tapestry, &c.: any large sketch or design on
paper, esp. a representation of current events in a comic paper.--_v.t._ to
make a cartoon or working design: to caricature by a cartoon.--_n._
CARTOON'IST, one who makes cartoons. [Fr. _carton_ (It. _cartone_),
augmentative of CARTE.]

CARTOUCHE, kär-t[=oo]sh', _n._ a case for holding cartridges: formerly a
case containing bullets to be discharged from a mortar, but now merely a
waterproof canvas case for holding the cartridges of a field battery, one
to each ammunition-box: (_archit._) an ornament resembling a scroll of
paper with the ends rolled up: an oval figure on ancient Egyptian monuments
or papyri enclosing characters expressing royal or divine names.--Also
CARTOUCH'. [Fr.,--It. _cartoccio_--L. _charta_, paper.]

[Illustration]

CARTRIDGE, kär'trij, _n._ a case made of paper, pasteboard, metal, &c.,
containing the charge for a gun--BLANK'-CAR'TRIDGES contain powder only;
BALL'-CARTRIDGES contain a bullet as well.--_ns._ CAR'TRIDGE-BAG, a bag of
flannel, merino, &c., for holding a charge for a cannon; CAR'TRIDGE-BELT, a
belt having pockets for cartridges; CAR'TRIDGE-BOX, a small box for holding
cartridges, carried by soldiers; CAR'TRIDGE-P[=A]'PER, a light-coloured,
strong paper, originally manufactured for making cartridges. [A corr. of
CARTOUCHE.]

CARTULARY, kär't[=u]-lar-i, _n._ a register-book of a monastery, &c.: one
who kept the records: the place where the register is kept. [Low L.
_chartularium_--L. _chartula_, a document--_charta_, paper.]

CARUCATE, kar'u-k[=a]t, _n._ originally an amount of land such as one team
of oxen could plough in a season.--_n._ CAR'UCAGE, a tax on the carucate,
first imposed by Richard I. in 1198. [Low L. _carruc[=a]ta_,
ploughland--_carruca_, plough, from root of CAR.]

CARUNCLE, kar-unk'l, _n._ a small fleshy excrescence, as the wattles of the
turkey-cock.--_adjs._ CARUN'CULAR, CARUN'CULATE, CARUN'CULOUS. [Fr.--L.
_caruncula_.]

CARUS, kä'rus, _n._ complete insensibility. [Gr. _karos_, stupor.]

CARVE, kärv, _v.t._ to cut into forms, devices, &c.: to make or shape by
cutting: to cut up (meat) into slices or pieces: to apportion or
distribute: (_Shak._) to speak with suavity.--_v.i._ to exercise the trade
of a sculptor.--_p.adj._ CARV'EN, carved.--_ns._ CARV'ER, one who carves: a
sculptor: a carving-knife; CARV'ING, the act or art of carving, a branch of
sculpture usually performed on wood or ivory: the device or figure carved:
the act or art of cutting up meat at table.--CARVE OUT, to hew out: to gain
by one's exertions.--CUT AND CARVE, to refine. [A. S. _ceorfan_, to cut;
Dut. _kerven_; Ger. _kerben_, to notch.]

CARVEL, kär'vel, _n._ older form of CARAVEL.--_adj._ CAR'VEL-BUILT, as
distinguished from _clinker-built_ (q.v. under CLINK).

CARVY, kär'vi', _n._ Scotch form of CARAWAY.

CARYATID, kar-i-at'id, _n._ a female figure used instead of a column to
support an entablature:--_pl._ CARYAT'IDES.--_adjs._ CARYAT'IC,
CARYAT'IDAL, CARYATID[=E]'AN, CARYATID'IC. [Gr. _Karyatides_.]

CARYOPHYLLACEOUS, kar-i-[=o]-fi-l[=a]'shi-us, _adj._ belonging to the
natural order _Caryophyllaceæ_;, applied esp. to flowers having five petals
with long claws, as in the clove-pink. [Gr. _karyophyllon_, the
clove-pink.]

CASCABEL, kas'ka-bel, _n._ the whole rear part behind the base-ring of a
cannon. [Sp.]

CASCADE, kas-k[=a]d', _n._ a waterfall: a trimming of lace or other
material in a loose wavy fall.--_v.i._ to fall in cascades. [Fr.,--It.--L.
_cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

CASCARA, kas'ka-ra, _n._ the _Cascara sagrada_, a Californian bark used as
a tonic aperient: the _Cascara amarga_, a bitter Honduras bark.--_n._
CASCARILL'A, the aromatic bitter bark of the West Indian _Croton
Eleuteria_. [Sp.]

CASCO, kas'k[=o], _n._ a form of boat used at Manila for lading and
unlading ships.

CASE, k[=a]s, _n._ a covering, box, or sheath: a set: an outer coating for
walls: in bookbinding, the boards and back, separate from the book: the
frame in which a compositor has his types before him while at work.--_v.t._
to supply with a case.--_n._ CASE'-BOTT'LE, a bottle made to fit into a
case with others.--_v.t._ CASE'-HARD'EN, to convert the surface of certain
kinds of malleable iron goods into steel, thereby making them harder, less
liable to rust, and capable of taking on a better polish.--_ns._
CASE'-HARD'ENING; CASE'-KNIFE, a large knife kept in a case; CASE'MAKER,
one who makes cases or covers for books; CASE'MENT, the case or frame of a
window: a window that opens on hinges: a hollow moulding.--_adj._
CASE'MENTED, having casements.--_ns._ CASE'-SHOT, canister-shot, an
artillery projectile for use at close quarters; CASE'-WORM, the caddice;
CAS'ING, the act of the verb CASE: an outside covering of any kind, as of
boards, plaster, &c. [O. Fr. _casse_--L. _capsa_--_cap[)e]re_, to take.]

CASE, k[=a]s, _n._ that which falls or happens, event: particular state or
condition--'in good case' = well off: subject of question or inquiry: an
instance of disease: a person under medical treatment: a legal statement of
facts: (_gram._) the inflection of nouns, &c.--CASE OF CONSCIENCE (see
CONSCIENCE).--IN ANY CASE, at all events: at any rate; IN CASE, in the
event that; IN CASE TO, in fit condition for; MAKE OUT ONE'S CASE, to give
good reasons for one's statements or position; PUT THE CASE, to suppose an
instance: to take for example; THE CASE, the fact, the reality. [O. Fr.
_cas_--L. _casus_, from _cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

CASEIN, CASEINE, k[=a]'s[=e]-in, _n._ an organic substance, contained in
milk and cheese.--_adjs._ C[=A]'S[=E]IC; C[=A]'S[=E]OUS, pertaining to
cheese. [Fr.,--L. _caseus_, cheese.]

CASEMATE, k[=a]s'm[=a]t, _n._ any bomb-proof vaulted chamber, even when
merely used as quarters for the garrison: (_orig._) a loopholed gallery,
from which the garrison of a fort could fire upon an enemy who had obtained
possession of the ditch.--_adj._ CASE'MATED. [Fr.; der. uncertain.]

CASEOUS. See CASEIN.

CASERN, ka-s[.e]rn', _n._ a lodging for troops in a town: a barrack.
[Fr.,--Sp. _caserna_--_casa_, a house.]

CASH, kash, _n._ coin or money: ready money.--_v.t._ to turn into or
exchange for money: to pay money for.--_ns._ CASH'-ACCOUNT', an account to
which nothing is carried but cash: a form of account with a bank, by which
a person is entitled to draw out sums as required by way of loan to a
stipulated amount--also called CASH'-CRED'IT; CASH'-BOOK, a book in which
an account is kept of the receipts and disbursements of money; CASHIER', a
cash-keeper: one who has charge of the receiving and paying of money;
CASH'-PAY'MENT, payment in ready money; CASH'-RAIL'WAY, a mechanical device
adopted in large shops and warehouses for the interchange of cash between
the counters and the cash-desk.--HARD CASH, ready money; OUT OF CASH, or IN
CASH, without or with money: out of, or in, pocket. [A doublet of CASE, a
box--O. Fr. _casse_, a box.]

CASHEW, ka-sh[=oo]', _n._ a spreading tree of no great height, in both the
East and West Indies, the fruit of which is a kidney-shaped nut at the end
of a pear-shaped fleshy stalk, the kernel of this nut and the fleshy stalk
(called the CASHEW'-APP'LE) being both used as food. [Fr.
_acajou_--Brazilian _acajoba_.]

CASHIER, kash-[=e]r', _v.t._ to dismiss from a post in disgrace: to discard
or put away: to annul.--_ns._ CASHIER'ER, one who cashiers; CASHIER'ING, a
punishment for officers in the army and navy, severer than dismissal,
inasmuch as it disqualifies from entering the public service in any
capacity; CASHIER'MENT, dismissal. [Dut. _casseren_, to cashier--L.
_cass[=a]re_, _cassus_, void, empty.]

CASHMERE, kash'm[=e]r, _n._ a rich kind of shawl made from the _Cashmere_
goat: any similar shawl.

CASINO, kas-[=e]'n[=o], _n._ a room for public dancing: a card-game. [It.;
from L. _casa_, a cottage.]

CASK, kask, _n._ a hollow round vessel for holding liquor, made of staves
bound with hoops: a measure of capacity: (_obs._) a casque,--_v.t._ to put
in a cask. [Fr. _casque_--Sp. _casco_, skull, helmet, cask.]

CASKET, kask'et, _n._ a little cask or case: a small case for holding
jewels, &c.: (_U.S._) a coffin. [Ety. uncertain; hardly a dim. of CASK.]

CASQUE, CASK, kask, _n._ a cover for the head: a helmet. [A doublet of
CASK.]

CASSANDRA, kas-an'dra, _n._ a daughter of Priam, king of Troy, beloved by
Apollo, who gave her the gift of prophecy, but not of being believed--hence
any one who takes gloomy views of the political or social future.

CASSAREEP, kas'a-r[=e]p, _n._ a sauce or condiment made from the juice of
the cassava, the chief ingredient in the West Indian pepper-pot.

CASSATION, kas-s[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of making null or void: (_French
law_) the act of annulling the decision of a court or judicial
tribunal--hence COURT OF CASSATION, the supreme tribunal. [Low L.
_cassation-em_--_cass[=a]re_, to bring to nought.]

CASSAVA, kas-sä'va, _n._ the West Indian name of the manioc, and the starch
produced from it, called Brazilian Arrowroot, or Tapioca.

CASSEROLE, kas'e-r[=o]l, _n._ a stew-pan: the outer part of several dressed
dishes. [Fr.]

CASSIA, kash'ya, _n._ a coarser kind of cinnamon--also CASS'IA-BARK: the
tree which yields the foregoing: a fragrant plant mentioned in Ps. xlv. 8
(Heb. _qeçî'ôth_, prob. the Ind. _orris_ or _costus_): a genus of shrubs of
the bean family (_Leguminosæ_), the leaves of several species yielding
senna, while the drug known as cassia fistula or purging cassia is derived
from the pod of _Cassia fistula_, the bark of which is used in tanning. [L.
_casia_--Gr. _kasia_--Heb.]

CASSIMERE, kas-i-m[=e]r', _n._ a twilled cloth of the finest wools.--Also
KERSEYMERE'. [Corr. of CASHMERE.]

CASSINO, kas-s[=e]'no, _n._ a game at cards. [See CASINO.]

CASSIOPEIA, kas-i-[=o]-p[=e]'ya, _n._ a constellation in the northern
hemisphere, near the North Pole, named after the mother of Andromeda in
Greek mythology.

CASSITERITE, ka-sit'e-r[=i]t, _n._ a brown native tin dioxide. [L.
_cassiterum_--Gr. _kassiteros_, tin.]

CASSOCK, kas'ok, _n._ a long loose black robe or outer coat, formerly in
common wear, but now worn only by clergy and choristers: a shorter garment,
usually of black silk, worn under the Geneva gown by Scotch
ministers.--_adj._ CASS'OCKED. [Fr. _casaque_--It. _casacca_, prob. from L.
_casa_, a cottage, a covering. Some explain Fr. _casaque_, _casaquin_, It.
_casacchino_, as from Ar. _kaz[=a]yand_, a padded jerkin.]

CASSOLETTE, kas'[=o]-let, _n._ a censer: a perfume-box with perforated lid.
[Fr.,--Sp. _cazoleta_--_cazo_, a saucepan.]

CASSONADE, kas-o-n[=a]d', _n._ raw or unrefined sugar. [Fr.]

CASSOWARY, kas'[=o]-war-i, _n._ a genus of running birds, nearly related to
the true ostrich, and nearer to the American rhea. [Malay _kasu[=a]r[=i]_
or _kasav[=a]r[=i]_.]

CAST, kast, _v.t._ to throw or fling: to throw off, shed, drop: to throw
down: to throw together or reckon: to mould or shape: (_B._) to consider,
to cast or throw up.--_v.i._ to warp:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ cast.--_n._ act
of casting: a throw of anything, as the sounding-lead, a fishing-line: the
thing thrown, esp. in angling: the distance thrown: a motion, turn, or
squint, as of the eye: a chance: a mould: the form received from a mould:
manner, stamp, or quality: a shade of colour, a degree of guilt, &c.: the
assignment of the various parts of a play to the several actors: the
company of actors to whom such have been assigned.--_n._ CAST'AWAY, one
cast away, an outcast.--_adj._ worthless, rejected.--_adjs._ CAST (_B._),
CAST'ED (_Shak._), cast off.--_ns._ CAST'ING, act of casting or moulding:
that which is cast: a mould; CAST'ING-NET, a species of net for fishing;
CAST'ING-VOTE, the voice or vote of the president of a meeting, by which he
is enabled, when the other votes are equally divided, to cast the balance
on the one side or the other; CAST'ING-WEIGHT, the weight which makes the
balance cast or turn when exactly poised.--_adj._ CAST'-OFF, laid aside or
rejected.--_n._ anything thrown aside.--_n._ CAST'-STEEL, steel that has
been melted, cast into ingots, and rolled out into bars.--CAST ABOUT, to
contrive, to look about, to search for, as game: (_B._) to turn, to go
round; CAST A NATIVITY, to make an astrological calculation; CAST ANCHOR,
to moor a ship; CAST AN EYE, A GLANCE, to look at; CAST A THING IN ONE'S
TEETH, to bring a reproach against some one; CAST AWAY, to wreck, to waste;
CAST DOWN, to deject or depress in mind: to turn the eyes downward; CAST
LOOSE, to set loose or adrift; CAST UP, to throw up, to bring up anything
as a reproach.--BE CAST (_law_), to be defeated.--THE LAST CAST, the last
venture. [Scand.; as Ice. _kasta_, to throw.]

CASTALIAN, kas-t[=a]'li-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Castalia_, a fountain in
Parnassus, sacred to Apollo and the Muses.

[Illustration]

CASTANET, kas'ta-net, _n._ a musical instrument of percussion in the form
of two hollow shells of ivory or hard wood, which are bound together by a
band fastening on the thumb, and struck by the fingers to produce a
trilling sound in keeping with the rhythm of the music--much used in Spain
as an accompaniment to dances and guitars. [Sp. _castañeta_--L. _castanea_,
a chestnut.]

CASTE, käst, _n._ a term applied chiefly to distinct classes or sections of
society in India, and, in a modified sense, to social distinctions of an
exclusive nature among other nations.--LOSE CASTE, to descend in social
rank. [A name given by the Portuguese to the classes of people in India;
Port. _casta_, breed, race.--L. _castus_, pure, unmixed.]

CASTELLAN, CASTELLATED. See CASTLE.

CASTIGATE, kas'tig-[=a]t, _v.t._ to chastise: to correct: to punish with
stripes.--_ns._ CASTIG[=A]'TION, act of castigating: chastisement: severe
punishment; CAS'TIG[=A]TOR, one who castigates.--_adj._ CAS'TIG[=A]TORY.
[L. _castig[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, from _castus_, pure.]

CASTILIAN, kas-til'yan, _adj._ and _n._ of or belonging to _Castile_, a
native of Castile, or the language thereof, standard Spanish.--CASTILE
SOAP, a hard soap made with olive-oil and soda.

CAST-IRON. See IRON.

CASTLE, kas'l, _n._ a fortified house or fortress: the residence of a
prince or nobleman, or a large country mansion generally: anything built in
the likeness of such: a defensive tower borne on an elephant's back: a
large ship, esp. of war.--_v.t._ to enclose or fortify with a
castle.--_v.i._ (_chess_) to bring the castle or rook up to the square next
the king, and move the king to the other side of the castle.--_n._
CAS'TELLAN, governor or captain of a castle.--_adj._ CAS'TELLATED, having
turrets and battlements like a castle.--_n._ CAS'TLE-BUILD'ING, the act of
building castles in the air or forming visionary projects.--_adj._
CAS'TLED, furnished with castles.--_n._ CAS'TLE-GUARD, the guard for the
defence of a castle.--CASTLES IN THE AIR, or IN SPAIN, groundless or
visionary projects.--THE CASTLE, Dublin Castle, the seat of the viceroy and
the executive--_Castle influence_, &c. [A.S. _castel_--L. _castellum_, dim.
of _castrum_, a fortified place.]

CASTOR, kas'tor, _n._ the beaver: a hat made of its fur. [L.,--Gr.
_kast[=o]r_; cf. Sans. _kasturi_, musk.]

CASTOR, kast'or, _n._ a small wheel on the legs of furniture: a small
vessel with perforated top for pepper, &c.--also CAST'ER. [From CAST.]

CASTOR-OIL, kas'tor-oil, _n._ a medicinal oil obtained from a tropical
plant, the _Ricinus communis_. [Ety. dub.; prob. from _castor_ or
_castoreum_, the unctuous substance obtained from two pear-shaped glands in
the beaver, formerly much used in midwifery.]

CASTRAL, kas'tral, _adj._ belonging to the camp. [L. _castra_.]

CASTRAMETATION, kas-tra-me-t[=a]'shun, _n._ the act or art of encamping.
[L. _castra_, a camp, _met[=a]ri_, _-atus_, to measure off--_meta_, a
boundary.]

CASTRATE, kas'tr[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of the power of generation, to
remove the testicles, geld, emasculate: to take from or render
imperfect.--_adj._ CAS'TRATED, expurgated.--_ns._ CASTR[=A]'TION, gelding,
expurgation; CASTRATO (kas-trä't[=o]), a male singer castrated in boyhood
so as to preserve a soprano or alto voice:--_pl._ CASTRA'TI. [L.
_castr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_.]

CASUAL, kash'[=u]-al, _adj._ accidental: unforeseen: occasional.--_n._ a
chance or occasional visitor, labourer, pauper, &c.--_n._ CAS'UALISM, the
belief that chance governs all things.--_adv._ CAS'UALLY, in a casual
manner.--_n._ CAS'UALTY, that which falls out: an accident: a misfortune:
(_pl._) losses of a military force by death, desertion, &c.: an incidental
charge or payment.--CASUALTIES OF SUPERIORITY, in the feudal law of
Scotland, such emoluments arising to the superior as depend on uncertain
events--those of non-entry, relief or composition, and escheat alone
remaining, but considerably modified by the Conveyancing Act of
1874.--CASUALTY WARD, the ward in a hospital in which accidents are
treated; CASUAL WARD, a ward set apart for the use of those who are only
occasionally in destitution. [L. _casualis_--_casus_. See CASE.]

CASUARINA, kas-[=u]-ar-[=e]n'a, _n._ a genus of Australian trees having
thread-like, jointed, pendent branches, with small toothed sheaths at the
joints, like the horse-tails--the _Swamp-oak_ and _She-oak_ belong to it,
and its wood is the well-known _Beef-wood_.

CASUIST, kaz'[=u]-ist, _n._ one who studies and resolves cases of
conscience.--_adjs._ CASUIST'IC, -AL, relating to cases of
conscience.--_n._ CAS'UISTRY, the science or doctrine of cases of
conscience, or the reasoning which enables a man to decide in a particular
case between apparently conflicting duties. [Fr. _casuiste_--L. _casus_.
See CASE.]

CASULA, kas'[=u]-la, _n._ a chasuble.

CAT, kat, _n._ a common domestic animal kept to devour mice: a spiteful
woman: a movable pent-house used for their protection by besiegers: a
double tripod with six legs: a piece of wood tapering at each end, struck
with the CAT-STICK in the game of _tip-cat_, this game itself: short for
the CAT-O'-NINE'-TAILS, an instrument of punishment consisting of a whip
with nine tails or lashes, with three or four knots on each, once used in
the army and navy.--_v.t._ to raise the anchor to the cathead.--_ns._
CAT'AMOUNT, a common name in the United States for the cougar or puma--also
called _Panther_, _Painter_, and _American lion_; CATAMOUN'TAIN, or CAT O'
MOUNTAIN, a leopard, panther, or ocelot: a wild mountaineer.--_adj._
ferocious, savage.--_adj._ CAT-AND-DOG, used attributively for
quarrelsome.--_ns._ CAT'-BIRD, an American bird of the thrush family, so
called on account of the resemblance of its note to the mewing of a cat;
CAT'-CALL, a squeaking instrument used in theatres to express dislike of a
play: a shrill whistle or cry.--_v.i._ to sound a cat-call.--_v.t._ to
assail with such.--_adj._ CAT'-EYED, having eyes like a cat: able to see in
the dark.--_n._ CAT'GUT, a kind of cord made from the intestines of
animals, and used as strings for violins, harps, guitars, &c., the cords of
clock-makers, &c.: the violin or other stringed instrument: a coarse corded
cloth.--_adj._ CAT'-HAMMED, with thin hams like a cat's.--_ns._ CAT'HEAD,
one of two strong beams of timber projecting from the bow of a ship, on
each side of the bowsprit, through which the ropes pass by which the anchor
is raised; CAT'-HOLE, one of two holes in the after part of a ship, through
which hawsers may pass for steadying the ship or for heaving astern;
CAT'HOOD, state of being a cat or having the nature of a cat; CAT'KIN, a
crowded spike or tuft of small unisexual flowers with reduced scale-like
bracts, as in the willow, hazel, &c.; CAT'-LAP, any thin or poor
drink.--_adj._ CAT'-LIKE, noiseless, stealthy.--_ns._ CAT'LING, a little
cat, a kitten: the downy moss on some trees, like the fur of a cat:
(_Shak._) a lute-string; CAT'MINT, a perennial plant resembling mint, said
to be so called from the fondness cats have for it; CAT'S'-CR[=A]'DLE, a
game played by children, two alternately taking from each other's fingers
an intertwined cord, so as always to maintain a symmetrical figure;
CAT'S'-EYE, a beautiful variety of quartz, so called from the resemblance
which the reflection of light from it bears to the light that seems to
emanate from the eye of a cat; CAT'S-FOOT, a plant, called also
_Ground-ivy_; CAT'-SIL'VER, a variety of silvery mica; CAT'S'-MEAT, horses'
flesh, or the like, sold for cats by street dealers; CAT'S'-PAW (_naut._),
a light breeze: the dupe or tool of another--from the fable of the monkey
who used the paws of the cat to draw the roasting chestnuts out of the
fire; CAT'S'-TAIL, a catkin: a genus of aquatic plants of the reed kind,
the leaves of which are sometimes used for making mats, seating chairs,
&c.: a kind of grass.--_adj._ CAT'-WIT'TED, small-minded, conceited, and
spiteful.--CATTED AND FISHED, said of an anchor raised to the cathead and
secured to the ship's side.--BELL THE CAT (see BELL).--CARE KILLED THE CAT,
even with his proverbial nine lives.--CHESHIRE CATS are proverbially
notable for grinning, and KILKENNY CATS proverbially fight till each
destroys the other.--RAIN CATS AND DOGS, to pour down heavily.--SEE WHICH
WAY THE CAT JUMPS, to watch how things are going to turn before committing
one's self.--TURN THE CAT IN THE PAN, to change sides with dexterity.--For
GIB-CAT, TABBY-CAT, TOM-CAT, see under GIB, TABBY, &c. [A.S. _cat_; found
also in Celt., Slav., Ar., Finn, &c.]

CAT, kat, _n._ an old name for a coal and timber vessel on the north-east
coast of England.--_adj._ CAT'-RIGGED, having one great fore-and-aft
mainsail spread by a gaff at the head and a boom at the foot, for smooth
water only.

CATABOLISM. See KATABOLISM.

CATACAUSTIC, kat-a-kaws'tik, _adj._ (_geom._) belonging to caustic curves
formed by reflection (see CAUSTIC). [Gr. _kata_, against, and CAUSTIC.]

CATACHRESIS, kat-a-kr[=e]'sis, _n._ (_rhet._) a figure by which a word is
used in a sense different from, yet analogous to, its own: a harsh or
far-fetched metaphor.--_adjs._ CATACHRES'TIC, -AL.--_adv._
CATACHRES'TICALLY. [L.,--Gr. _katachr[=e]sis_, misuse.]

CATACLYSM, kat'a-klizm, _n._ a flood of water: a deluge: great
revolution.--_adj._ CATACLYS'MIC. [Gr. _kataklysmos_--_kata_, downward,
_klyzein_, to wash.]

CATACOMB, kat'a-k[=o]m, _n._ a subterranean excavation used as a
burial-place, esp. the famous Catacombs near Rome, where many of the early
Christian victims of persecution were buried: any place built with
crypt-like recesses for storing books, wine, &c.--_adj._ CAT'ACUMBAL. [It.
_catacomba_--Late L. _catacumbas_ (prob. from _ad catacumbas_), prob. from
Gr. _kata_, downward, and _kymb[=e]_, a hollow.]

CATACOUSTICS, kat-a-kows'tiks, _n._ the part of acoustics which treats of
echoes or sounds reflected. [Gr. _kata_, against, and ACOUSTICS.]

CATADIOPTRIC, -AL, kat-a-di-op'trik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to instruments
by which rays of light are both reflected and refracted. [See CATOPTRIC.]

CATADROMOUS, kat-ad'rom-us, _adj._ of fishes, descending periodically for
spawning to the lower parts of a river or to the sea. [Gr. _kata_, down,
_dromos_, running.]

CATAFALQUE, kat-a-falk', _n._ a temporary structure of carpentry
representing a tomb or cenotaph placed over the coffin during a
lying-in-state: a tomb of state, a funeral car.--Also CATAFAL'CO.
[Fr.,--It. _catafalco_. See BALCONY and SCAFFOLD.]

CATALAN, kat'al-an, _adj._ of or belonging to _Catalonia_ or its language,
a dialect of Provençal.--_n._ a native of Catalonia, or the language
thereof.

CATALECTIC, kat-a-lek'tik, _adj._ incomplete: applied to a verse wanting
one syllable at the end, or terminating in an imperfect foot. [Gr.
_katal[=e]ktikos_, incomplete--_katal[=e]gein_, to stop.]

CATALEPSY, kat'a-lep-si, _n._ a state of more or less complete
insensibility, with absence of the power of voluntary motion, and
statue-like fixedness of the body and limbs.--_adj._ CATALEP'TIC. [Gr.,
from _kata_, down, _lamban[=o]_, _l[=e]psomai_, I seize.]

CATALLACTIC, kat-al-ak'tik, _adj._ pertaining to exchange.--_adv._
CATALLAC'TICALLY.--_n._ CATALLAC'TICS, political economy as the science of
exchanges. [Made up from Gr. _katalassein_, to exchange.]

CATALOGUE, kat'a-log, _n._ a list of names, books, &c.--_v.t._ to put in a
catalogue:--_pr.p._ cat'aloguing; _pa.p._ cat'alogued.--_v.t._
CAT'ALOGUISE. [Fr.--Late L.--Gr. _katalogos_, from _kata_, down, _legein_,
to choose.]

CATALPA, kat-al'pa, _n._ a genus of hardy trees native to the United States
and Japan, marked by a low habit, profuse blossoms, and long cigar-like
pendent pods.--The common Catalpa, known also as the _Bean-tree_,
_Catawba_, _Indian bean_, and _Cigar-tree_, yields a durable wood; as also
the western Catalpa or _Shawnee wood_. [From the native Ind. name.]

CATALYSIS, ka-tal'i-sis, _n._ (_chem._) the decomposition of a compound and
the recomposition of its elements, by the presence of a substance which
does not itself suffer change, as in fermentation.--_adj._ CATALYT'IC. [Gr.
_katalysis_--_kata_, down, _lyein_, to loosen.]

CATAMARAN, kat'a-mar-an', or kat-am'ar-an, _n._ a raft of three pieces of
wood lashed together, the middle piece being longer than the others, and
serving as a keel--on this the rower squats, and works a paddle--much used
in the Madras surf: an old kind of fire-ship, long superseded; an
ill-natured woman. [Tamil, 'tied wood.']

CATAMENIA, kat-a-m[=e]'ni-a, _n._ the menstrual discharge.--_adj._
CATAM[=E]'NIAL. [Gr. _katam[=e]nios_--_kata_, again, _m[=e]n_, _m[=e]nos_,
a month.]

CATAMITE, kat'a-m[=i]t, _n._ a boy kept for unnatural purposes--a
corruption of GANYMEDE (q.v.).

CATAMOUNT. See CAT.

CATAPAN, kat'a-pan, _n._ the governor of Calabria and Apulia for the
Byzantine emperor. [Acc. to Littré, from Gr. _katepan[=o] t[=o]n
axi[=o]mat[=o]n_, 'he who is placed over the dignities.']

CATAPHONICS, kat-a-fon'iks, _n._ the science of reflected sounds.--_adj._
CATAPHON'IC. [Gr. _kata_, against, _phon[=e]_, sound.]

CATAPHRACT, kat'a-frakt, _n._ (_Milton_) a soldier in full armour. [Gr.
_kataphrakt[=e]s_, a coat-of-mail--_kata_, inten., and _phrass-ein_, to
enclose, protect.]

CATAPHYLLARY, kat-a-fil'ar-i, _adj._ pertaining to such rudimentary
scale-leaves as are found on various parts of plants, esp.
underground.--_n._ CATAPHYLL'UM. [Gr. _kata_, down, _phyllon_, leaf.]

CATAPHYSICAL, kat-a-fis'i-kal, _adj._ (_rare_) unnatural. [Gr. _kata_,
down, against, _physis_, nature.]

CATAPLASM, kat'a-plazm, _n._ a plaster or poultice. [Gr. _kataplasma_, a
plaster--_kata-plassein_, to plaster over.]

CATAPLEXY, kat'a-plex-i, _n._ the kind of mesmeric sleep of animals under a
sudden shock of terror--the state of 'shamming death.'--_adj._
CATAPLEC'TIC. [Gr. _katapl[=e]ssein_, to strike down.]

CATAPULT, kat'a-pult, _n._ anciently an engine of war, resembling the
ballista, for throwing stones, arrows, &c.: a small forked stick having an
elastic string fixed to the two prongs, used by boys for throwing small
stones.--_adj._ CATAPUL'TIC.--_n._ CATAPULTIER'. [L. _catapulta_--Gr.
_katapelt[=e]s_--_kata_, down, _pallein_, to throw.]

CATARACT, kat'a-rakt, _n._ a great fall of water, water-spout, &c.: a
waterfall or cascade: an opaque condition of the lens of the eye, painless,
unaccompanied by inflammation, occasioning blindness, simply by obstructing
the passage of the light. [L. _cataracta_--Gr. _kata_, down, _arass-ein_,
to dash, to rush.]

CATARRH, kat-är', _n._ a discharge of fluid from the inflammation of a
mucous membrane, esp. of the nose, caused by cold in the head: the cold
itself.--_adjs._ CATARRH'AL, CATARRH'OUS. [L. _catarrhus_--Gr.
_katarrhous_--_kata_, down, _rhe[=e]in_, to flow.]

CATARRHINE, CATARHINE, kat'ar-[=i]n, _adj._ pertaining to that one of the
two divisions of Quadrumana, including all the Old-World monkeys, having a
narrow partition between the nostrils. [Gr. _kata_, down, _hris_, _hrinos_,
nose.]

CATASTA, kat-äs'ta, _n._ a block on which slaves were exposed for sale: a
stage or place for torture. [L.]

CATASTASIS, kat-as'tas-is, _n._ the part of the Greek drama in which the
development of the action has reached its height: (_rhet._) that part of a
speech which states the subject to be discussed. [Gr.]

CATASTROPHE, kat-as'tr[=o]-f[=e], _n._ an overturning: a final event: an
unfortunate conclusion: a calamity.--_adj._ CATASTROPH'IC--_ns._
CATAS'TROPHISM, the theory in geology that accounts for 'breaks in the
succession' by the hypothesis of vast catastrophes--world-wide destruction
of floras and faunas, and the sudden introduction or creation of new forms
of life, after the forces of nature had sunk into repose; CATAS'TROPHIST, a
holder of the foregoing, as opposed to the _uniformitarian_ theory. [Gr.,
_kata_, down, _strephein_, to turn.]

CATAWBA, ka-taw'ba, _n._ a light sparkling wine, produced from a grape of
the same name, first found on the banks of the _Catawba_ River in Carolina.

CAT-BIRD. See CAT.

CAT-CALL. See CAT.

CATCH, kach, _v.t._ to take hold of: to apprehend or understand: to seize
after pursuit: to trap or ensnare: to take a disease by infection: to take
up anything by sympathy or imitation.--_v.i._ to be contagious: to be
entangled or fastened in anything;--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ caught
(kawt).--_n._ seizure: anything that seizes or holds: that which is caught:
anything worth catching: a sudden advantage taken: a specially English form
of musical composition, written generally in three or four parts, and in
the canon form--originally synonymous with the _round_.--_adj._ CATCH'ABLE,
that may be caught.--_ns._ CATCH'ER, one who catches; CATCH'FLY, a popular
name of several plants belonging to the genus _Silene_, and of _Lychnis
Viscaria_, whose glutinous stems often retain insects settling on them;
CATCH'ING, the action of the verb 'to catch:' a nervous or spasmodic
twitching.--_adj._ infectious: captivating, attractive.--_ns._
CATCH'MENT-B[=A]S'IN, a term applied to all that part of a river-basin from
which rain is collected, and from which, therefore, the river is fed;
CATCH'PENNY, any worthless thing, esp. a publication, intended merely to
gain money--also _adj._; CATCH'WORD, among actors, the last word of the
preceding speaker--the cue: the word at the head of the page in a
dictionary or encyclopædia: the first word of a page given at the bottom of
the preceding page: any word or phrase taken up and repeated as the
watchword or symbol of a party.--_adj._ CATCH'Y, attractive, deceptive,
readily caught up, as an air, &c., fitful.--CATCH AT, to snatch at; CATCH
FIRE, to become ignited, to be inspired by passion or zeal; CATCH HOLD OF,
to seize; CATCH IT, to get a scolding or the like; CATCH ME! an emphatic
colloquial phrase implying that there is not the remotest possibility of my
doing something suggested; CATCH ON, to comprehend: to catch the popular
fancy; CATCH OUT, to put a batsman out at cricket by catching the ball he
has batted; CATCH SIGHT OF, suddenly to get a glimpse of; CATCH UP, to
overtake; CATCH UP, or AWAY, to lay hold of forcibly. [From O. Fr.
_cachier_--Late L. _capti[=a]re_ for _capt[=a]re_, inten. of _cap[)e]re_,
to take. See CHASE.]

CATCHPOLE, -POLL, kach'p[=o]l, _n._ a constable, petty officer of justice.
[Through O. Fr. from Low L. _cachepolus_, _chassipullus_, one who chases
fowls. See CHASE and PULLET.]

CATCHUP, CATSUP. See KETCHUP.

CATE. See CATES.

CATECHISE, kat'e-k[=i]z, _v.t._ to instruct by question and answer: to
question as to belief: to examine systematically, to take to task.--_adjs._
CATECHET'IC, -AL, relating to a catechism or oral instruction in the first
principles, esp. of Christianity.--_adv._ CATECHET'ICALLY.--_ns._
CATECHET'ICS, the art or practice of teaching by question and answer: that
part of theology which treats of CATECH[=E]'SIS, or primary oral
instruction, as that given to catechumens; CAT'ECHISER; CAT'ECHISING, an
examination by questioning; CAT'ECHISM, any compendious system of teaching
drawn up in the form of question and answer; CAT'ECHIST, one who
catechises, a teacher of catechumens, a native teacher in a mission
church.--_adjs._ CATECHIST'IC, -AL, CATECHIS'MAL, pertaining to a catechist
or catechism. [L. _catechismus_, formed from Gr. _kat[=e]chiz-ein_,
_kat[=e]che-ein_, to din into the ears--_kata_, down, _[=e]ch[=e]_, a
sound.]

CATECHU, kat'e-shoo, _n._ a substance used in tanning and dyeing, and
medicinally as an astringent, obtained from the heart-wood of several East
Indian trees, as the betel-nut, &c. [Tamil.]

CATECHUMEN, kat-e-k[=u]'men, _n._ one who is being taught the rudiments of
Christianity: the appellation given in the early Christian Church to those
converted Jews and heathens who had not yet received baptism, but were
undergoing a course of training and instruction preparatory to it.--_adj._
CATECHUMEN'ICAL.--_adv._ CATECHUMEN'ICALLY.--_ns._ CATECH[=U]'MENSHIP,
CATECH[=U]'MENISM, CATECH[=U]'MENATE. [Gr. _kat[=e]choumenos_, being
taught, pr.p. pass. of _kat[=e]che-ein_, to teach.]

CATEGORY, kat'e-gor-i, _n._ what may be affirmed of a class: a class or
order.--_adjs._ CATEGOREMAT'IC, capable of being used by itself as a term;
CATEGOR'ICAL, positive: absolute: without exception.--_adv._
CATEGOR'ICALLY, absolutely: without qualification: expressly.--_n._
CATEGOR'ICALNESS, the quality of being absolute and unqualified.--_n.pl._
CAT'EGORIES (_phil._), the highest classes under which objects of
philosophy can be systematically arranged, understood as an attempt at a
comprehensive classification of all that exists: in Kant's system, the
root-notions of the understanding, the specific forms of the _a priori_ or
formal element in rational cognition (_quantity_, _quality_, _relation_,
_modality_, &c.).--_v.t._ CAT'EGORISE, to place in a category or list: to
class.--_n._ CATEGOR'IST, one who categorises.--CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE, in
the ethics of Kant, the absolute unconditional command of the moral law,
irrespective of every ulterior end or aim--universally authoritative,
belonging to the fixed law of nature--'Act from a maxim at all times fit
for law universal.' [Gr. _kat[=e]goria_, _kat[=e]goros_, an accuser,
_kata_, down, against, _agora_, assembly.]

CATELECTRODE, kat-[=e]-lek'tr[=o]d, _n._ a negative electrode or cathode.
[Gr. _kata_, down, and ELECTRODE.]

CATENARY, kat-[=e]'nar-i, _n._ the curve formed by a flexible homogeneous
cord (such as a chain), hanging freely between two points of support, and
acted on by no other force than gravity.--_adj._ relating to a chain, like
a chain--also CATEN[=A]'RIAN.--_n._ CAT[=E]'NA, a chain or connected
series, as in CATENA PATRUM, a chronological series of extracts from the
Fathers on any doctrine of theology.--_v.t._ CAT'EN[=A]TE to connect as in
a chain.--_n._ CATEN[=A]'TION. [L. _catenarius_, pertaining to a
chain--_cat[=e]na_, chain.]

CATER, k[=a]'t[.e]r, _v.i._ to provide food, entertainment, &c. (with
_for_).--_ns._ C[=A]'TERER; C[=A]'TERESS; C[=A]'TERING. [Lit. to act as a
_cater_, the word being orig. a substantive, and spelled _catour_, an
aphetised form of _acater_, _acatour_. See ACATER.]

CATERAN, kat'er-an, _n._ a Highland reiver or freebooter, a robber or
brigand generally. [Gael. _ceathairne_, peasantry, Ir. _ceithern_, a band
of soldiers.]

CATER-COUSIN, k[=a]'t[.e]r-kuz'n, _n._ a term implying familiarity,
affection, sympathy, rather than kindred. [More prob. conn. with CATER than
_quatre_ or _quarter_.]

CATERPILLAR, kat'[.e]r-pil-ar, _n._ a grub that lives upon the leaves of
plants. [Prob. O. Fr. _chatepeleuse_, 'hairy cat;' _chate_, a she-cat--L.
_catus_, _peleuse_, hairy--L. _pilosus_, _pilum_.]

CATERWAUL, kat'[.e]r-wawl, _n._ the shriek or cry emitted by the cat when
in heat.--_v.i._ to make such a noise, to make any discordant sound: to
behave lasciviously: to quarrel like cats.--_n._ CAT'ERWAULING. [The second
part is prob. imit.]

CATES, k[=a]tz, _n.pl._ dainty food.

CATGUT. See CAT.

CATHARIST, kath'ar-ist, _n._ one professing a higher standard of purity in
life and doctrine, a puritan: esp. a member of a Manichean heretical sect
of the Middle Ages, which spread over the whole of southern and western
Europe--confounded with the kindred sect of Paulicians, reaching the
greatest numbers in southern France, where, as the Albigenses, they were
ruthlessly stamped out by the Inquisition.--_n._ CATH'ARISM. [Gr.
_katharistai_, _katharizein_, to purify.]

CATHARTIC, -AL, kath-ärt'ik, -al, _adj._ having the power of cleansing the
stomach and bowels: purgative.--_v.t._ CATH'ARISE, to render absolutely
clean.--_ns._ CATHAR'SIS, evacuation of the bowels; CATHART'IC, a purgative
medicine; CATHAR'TIN, the purgative principle of senna. [Gr. _kathartikos_,
fit for cleansing, _katharos_, clean.]

CATHEAD. See CAT.

CATHEDRAL, kath-[=e]d'ral, _n._ the principal church of a diocese, in which
is the seat or throne of a bishop.--_adj._ belonging to a cathedral.--_n._
CATHED'RA, a bishop's seat, the episcopal dignity--EX CATHEDRA, from the
chair, officially given forth.--_adjs._ CATHEDRAL'IC, CATHEDRALESQUE',
CATHED'RALED, vaulted like a cathedral.--_n._ CATHED'RALISM, the cathedral
system.--_adj._ CATHEDRAT'IC, promulgated _ex cathedra_, authoritative. [L.
_cathedra_--Gr. _kathedra_, a seat.]

CATHERINE-WHEEL, kath'e-rin-hw[=e]l, _n._ (_archit._) an ornamented window
or compartment of a window, of a circular form, with radiating divisions of
various colours: (_her._) a wheel set round with teeth: a kind of firework
which in burning rotates like a wheel.--CATHERINE PEAR, a small and early
variety of pear.--TURN CATHERINE-WHEELS, to make a series of somersaults
sideways. [From St _Catherine_ of Alexandria, whom legend makes to suffer
martyrdom in the 4th century by torture on a wheel.]

CATHETER, kath'e-t[.e]r, _n._ a tube to be introduced through the urethra
into the bladder to draw off the urine, or for injecting air or fluids into
the Eustachian tube.--_ns._ CATH'ETERISM; CATHETOM'ETER, an instrument for
measuring small differences of level of different liquids in tubes;
CATH'ETUS, a straight line falling perpendicularly on another straight line
or surface. [Gr. _kathetos_, perpendicular, _kathet[=e]r_, from
_kathienai_, to send down.]

CATHISMA, ka-thiz'ma, _n._ in Greek use, a portion of the psalter, there
being altogether twenty cathismata: a troparion or short hymn used as a
response. [Gr., _kathizein_, to sit down.]

CATHODE, kath-[=o]d', _n._ the negative pole or electrode of a galvanic
battery, as opposed to _anode_: the surface in contact with the negative
pole: the object to be coated in electroplating--_adj._ CATH'ODAL. [Gr.
_kathodos_, a going down, _kata_, down, _hodos_, a way.]

CAT-HOLE. See CAT.

CATHOLIC, kath'ol-ik, _adj._ universal: general, embracing the whole body
of Christians: orthodox, as opposed to _heterodox_ and _sectarian_--applied
esp. to the Christian Church before the great schism between the East and
the West: liberal, the opposite of exclusive: relating to the name claimed
by its adherents for the Church of Rome as the alleged sole visible
representative of the church founded by Christ and His apostles--the
characteristic marks of the Catholic Church being _universality_,
_antiquity_, _unity_: relating to the Roman Catholics.--_n._ an adherent of
the R.C. Church.--_v.t._ CATHOL'ICISE, to make Catholic.--_ns._
CATHOL'ICISM, CATHOLIC'ITY, universality: liberality or breadth of view:
the tenets of the R.C. Church; CATHOL'ICON, a universal remedy or panacea;
CATHOL'ICOS, the Patriarch of Armenia.--CATHOLIC CREDITOR (_law of Scot._),
one whose debt is secured over several or the whole subjects belonging to
the debtor--e.g. over two or more heritable estates; CATHOLIC EMANCIPATION,
the relief of the Roman Catholics from certain vexatious penal regulations
and restrictions, granted in 1829; CATHOLIC or GENERAL EPISTLES, the name
given to certain epistles in the canon addressed not to particular churches
or individuals, but either to the Church universal or to a large and
indefinite circle of readers--originally only 1 John and 1 Peter, but, as
early as the 3d century, also James, Jude, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John; CATHOLIC
KING, a title given specially to the king of Spain.--OLD CATHOLICS, the
title assumed by a number of Catholics who at Munich protested against the
new dogma of the personal infallibility of the pope in all _ex cathedrâ_
deliverances proclaimed by the Vatican Council in 1870--now a considerable
communion or church in Germany and Switzerland. [Gr. _katholicos_,
universal--_kata_, throughout, _holos_, the whole.]

CATILINE, kat'il-[=i]n, _n._ the type of a daring and reckless conspirator,
from L. Sergius _Catilina_, whose plot to destroy Rome was foiled by
Cicero, 63 B.C.--_adj._ CAT'ILIN[=A]RIAN.

CATKIN. See CAT.

CAT-LOG, kat'-log, _n._ (_Shak._). CATALOGUE.

CATONIAN, ka-t[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ resembling _Cato_, the Roman Censor (died
149 B.C.), or Cato Uticensis (95-46 B.C.), both remarkable for gravity of
manners--hence grave, severe, unbending.

CATOPTRIC, kat-op'trik, _adj._ relating to catoptrics or vision by
reflection.--_n.pl._ CATOP'TRICS, the part of optics which treats of
reflected light. [Gr.; from _katoptron_, a mirror--_kata_, against,
_optesthai_, to see.]

CAT'S-TAIL. See CAT.

CATTLE, kat'l, _n.pl._ beasts of pasture, esp. oxen, bulls, and cows:
sometimes also horses, sheep, &c.--_ns._ CATT'LEMAN, one who tends cattle,
or who rears them on a ranch; CATT'LE-PLAGUE, plague or disease among
cattle, esp. that known as rinderpest or steppe murrain; CATT'LE-SHOW, an
exhibition or show of cattle or other domestic animals in competition for
prizes. [O. Fr. _catel_, _chatel_--Low L. _captale_, orig. capital,
property in general, then esp. animals--L. _capitalis_, chief--_caput_, the
head, beasts in early times forming the chief part of property.]

CATTY, kat'i, _n._ the Chinese kin or pound, usually a little over 1¼ lb.
avoirdupois.

CAUCASIAN, kaw-k[=a]'zhi-an, _adj._ pertaining to Mount _Caucasus_ or the
country around it.--_n._ the name adopted by Blumenbach for one of his main
ethnological divisions of mankind, by him made to include the two great
groups, the Aryan and the Semitic; used by later anthropologists for the
fair type of man as opposed to the Mongolic or yellow type.

CAUCUS, kaw'kus, _n._ a private meeting of political wire-pullers to agree
upon candidates to be proposed for an ensuing election, or to fix the
business to be laid before a general meeting of their party: applied
loosely to any influential committee in a constituency. [Ety. dub.; perh.
John Smith's Algonkin word _Caw-cawaassough_, an adviser; perh. a corr. of
'_caulkers'_ meetings.']

CAUDAL, kaw'dal, _adj._ pertaining to the tail: having a tail or something
like one.--_adj._ CAU'D[=A]TE, tailed. [L. _cauda_.]

CAUDEX, kaw'deks, _n._ (_bot._) the stem of a tree, esp. of a palm or
tree-fern:--_pl._ CAUD'ICES, CAUD'EXES.--_n._ CAUDICLE, the stalk of the
pollen-masses of certain orchids. [L.]

CAUDLE, kaw'dl, _n._ a warm drink, sweetened and spiced, given to the sick,
esp. women in childbed.--_v.t._ to give a caudle to, to mix. [O. Fr.
_chaudel_--L. _calidus_, hot.]

CAUDRON, kaw'dron, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as CAULDRON.

CAUGHT, kawt, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of CATCH.

CAUK, kawk, _n._ chalk: sulphate of baryta or heavy spar. [A form of
CHALK.]

CAUKER. See CAULK.

CAUL, kawl, _n._ a net or covering for the head: the membrane covering the
head of some infants at their birth. [O. Fr. _cale_, a little cap, prob.
Celt.; cf. Ir. _calla_, a veil, hood.]

CAULD, kawld, _n._ (_Scot._) a dam in a stream, a weir.

CAULDRIFE, kawld'-r[=i]f, _adj._ (_Scot._) cold, chilly, lifeless, without
vigour.

CAULDRON, CALDRON, kawl'dron, _n._ a large kettle for boiling or heating
liquids. [O. Fr. _caudron_--L. _caldarium_--_calidus_, hot--_cal[=e]re_, to
be hot.]

CAULESCENT, kaw-les'ent, _adj._ (_bot._) having a stem rising above the
ground--also CAULIF'EROUS.--_n._ CAU'LICLE, a rudimentary stem.--_adj._
CAULIC'OLOUS, growing on a stem.--_n.pl._ CAULICUL[=A]'TA, the black or
antipatharian corals.--_adj._ CAULIC'UL[=A]TE.--_n._ CAULIC'ULUS, one of
the slender stems springing from the _caules_ or main stalks supporting the
volutes in the Corinthian capital.--_adjs._ CAUL'IFORM, having the form of
a stem; CAULIG'ENOUS, borne upon the stem; CAUL'INARY, CAU'LINE, belonging
to a stem.--_n._ CAU'LIS, the stem of a plant: one of the main stems at the
angles of the Corinthian capital. [L. _caulis_, a stalk.]

CAULIFLOWER, kaw'li-flow'[.e]r, _n._ a variety of cabbage, the eatable part
of which is the deformed inflorescence or head. [Earlier _cole-florye_,
_colie-florie_--Low L. _cauli-flora_--L. _caulis_, cabbage. See COLE and
FLOWER.]

CAULK, CALK, kawk, _v.t._ to press oakum and untwisted rope into the seams
of a ship to render it watertight.--_ns._ CAULK'ER, one who caulks: a dram:
a big lie--also CAUK'ER; CAULK'ING; CAULK'ING-[=I]'RON, an instrument like
a chisel used for pressing oakum into the seams of ships. [O. Fr.
_cauquer_, to press--L. _cacl[=a]re_, to tread--_calx_, heel.]

CAUSE, kawz, _n._ that which produces an effect: that by or through which
anything happens: motive: inducement: a legal action between contending
parties: sake, advantage: that side of a question which is taken up by an
individual or party: (_Shak._) accusation: (_Shak._) matter, affair in
general.--_v.t._ to produce: to make to exist: to bring about: (_Spens._)
to give excuses.--_conj._ (_dial._) because.--_adj._ CAUS'AL, relating to a
cause or causes.--_n._ CAUSAL'ITY, the working of a cause: (_phren._) the
faculty of tracing effects to their causes.--_adv._ CAUS'ALLY, according to
the order of causes.--_ns._ CAUS[=A]'TION, the act of causing: the bringing
about of an effect; the relation of cause and effect; CAUS[=A]'TIONISM, the
theory of causation; CAUS[=A]'TIONIST, a believer in the foregoing.--_adj._
CAUS'ATIVE, expressing causation.--_n._ a form of verb or noun expressing
such.--_adv._ CAUS'ATIVELY.--_adj._ CAUSE'LESS, having no cause or
occasion.--_adv._ CAUSE'LESSLY.--_ns._ CAUSE'LESSNESS; CAUS'ER, one who
causes an effect to be produced.--CAUSE CÉLÈBRE, a convenient French term
for a specially interesting and important legal trial, criminal or
civil.--FINAL CAUSE, the end or object for which a thing is done, esp. the
design of the universe; FIRST CAUSE, the original cause or creator of
all.--HOUR OF CAUSE (_Scot._), hour or time of trial.--SECONDARY CAUSES,
such as are derived from a primary or first cause.--HAVE or SHOW CAUSE, to
have to give reasons for a certain line of action; MAKE COMMON CAUSE
(_with_), to unite for a common object; SHOW CAUSE (_Eng. law_), to argue
against the confirmation of a provisional order or judgment.--For
OCCASIONAL CAUSES, see OCCASIONALISM. [Fr.,--L. _causa_.]

CAUSERIE, k[=o]z'ri, _n._ a talk or gossip: a paragraph of chat about
literature or art; a short and informal essay on any subject in a newspaper
or magazine--as in Sainte-Beuve's famous _Causeries du Lundi_. [Fr.]

CAUSEWAY, kawz'w[=a], CAUSEY, kawz'e, _n._ a raised way through a marsh: a
pathway raised and paved with stone: a paved street.--_v.t._ to
pave.--_p.adjs._ CAUSE'WAYED, CAUS'EYED. [CAUSEWAY is formed from CAUSEY
and WAY. CAUSEY is in M. E. _causee_--O. Fr. _caucie_--Low L.
_calciata_--L. _calx_, heel.]

CAUSTIC, kaws'tik, _adj._ burning: (_fig._) bitter, severe, cutting:
(_math._) noting an envelope of rays of light proceeding from a fixed point
and reflected (_catacaustic_) or refracted (_diacaustic_) by a surface or a
curve.--_n._ a substance that exerts a corroding or disintegrating action
on the skin and flesh.--_adv._ CAUS'TICALLY.--_n._ CAUSTIC'ITY, quality of
being caustic.--CAUSTIC ALKALI (_chem._), a name given to the hydrates of
potassium and sodium, called caustic potash and caustic soda respectively;
CAUSTIC AMMONIA, ammonia as a gas, or in solution; CAUSTIC LIME,
quicklime.--COMMON CAUSTIC, potash; LUNAR CAUSTIC, nitrate of silver in
sticks for surgical use. [L.,--Gr. _kaustikos_--_kai-ein_, _kaus-ein_, to
burn.]

CAUTEL, kaw'tel, _n._ (_Shak._) craft: insidious purpose: caution:
wariness: a traditionary caution or written direction about the proper
manner of administering the sacraments.--_adj._ CAU'TELOUS (_Shak._),
cautious: insidious: artful. [Fr. _cautèle_--L. _cautela_--_cav[=e]re_,
_cautum_, to guard against.]

CAUTERISE, kaw't[.e]r-[=i]z, _v.t._ to burn with a caustic or a hot iron:
(_fig._) to sear.--_ns._ CAU'TER, CAU'TERY, a burning with caustics or a
hot iron: a burning iron or caustic used for burning tissue;
CAUTERIS[=A]'TION, CAU'TERISM. [Fr. _cautériser_--Low L.
_cauteriz[=a]re_--Gr. _kaut[=e]r_, a hot iron--_kai-ein_, to burn.]

CAUTION, kaw'shun, _n._ heedfulness: security: warning: a surety: (_Scot._)
bail.--_v.t._ to warn to take care.--_adj._ CAU'TIONARY, containing
caution: given as a pledge.--_ns._ CAU'TIONER, one who cautions or advises:
(_Scots law_) a surety; CAU'TIONRY, the act of giving security for
another.--_adj._ CAU'TIOUS, possessing or using caution: watchful:
prudent.--_adv._ CAU'TIOUSLY.--_n._ CAU'TIOUSNESS.--CAUTION MONEY, money
paid in advance as security for good behaviour. [Fr.,--L.
_caution-em_--_cav[=e]re_, to beware.]

CAVALCADE, kav-al-k[=a]d', _n._ a train or procession of persons on
horseback.--_v.i._ to go in a cavalcade. [Fr., through It. and Low L. forms
from L. _caballus_, a horse.]

CAVALIER, kav-al-[=e]r', _n._ a knight: a Royalist in the great Civil War:
a swaggering fellow: a gallant or gentleman in attendance upon a lady, as
her escort or partner in a dance or the like: in military fortification, a
raised work so situated as to command the neighbouring country.--_adj._
like a cavalier: gay: war-like: haughty, supercilious,
free-and-easy.--_v.i._ to act as cavalier.--_adj._ CAVALIER'ISH.--_n._
CAVALIER'ISM.--_adv._ CAVALIER'LY.--_n._ CAVALIER'O, a
cavalier.--CAVALIERE-SERVENTE (It.), one who waits upon a lady, esp. a
married lady, with fantastic devotion--a cicisbeo. [Fr.,--It. _cavallo_.
See CAVALCADE.]

CAVALRY, kav'al-ri, _n._ horse-soldiers: a troop of horse or horsemen. [Fr.
_cavallerie_--It. _cavalleria_--L. _caballarius_, horseman.]

CAVASS. See KAVASS.

CAVATINA, kav-at-[=e]'na, _n._ a short form of operatic air, of a smooth
and melodious character, differing from the ordinary aria in consisting
only of one part, and frequently appearing as part of a grand scena. [It.]

CAVE, k[=a]v, _n._ a hollow place in the earth: a den: any small faction of
seceders from a political party.--_v.t._ to hollow out.--_v.i._ to lodge in
a cave.--_n._ CAVE'-BEAR (_Ursus spelæus_), a fossil bear of the Quaternary
epoch.--_n.pl._ CAVE'-DWELL'ERS, prehistoric men who lived in caves.--_n._
CAV'ING, yielding.--TO CAVE IN, of land, to slip, to fall into a hollow: to
yield to outside pressure, to give way, collapse. [Fr.,--L. _cavus_,
hollow.]

CAVEAT, k[=a]'ve-at, _n._ a notice or warning: a formal warning, entered in
the books of a court or public office, that no step shall be taken in a
particular matter without notice to the person lodging the caveat, so that
he may appear and object. [L., 'let him take care'--_cav[=e]re_, to take
care.]

CAVENDISH, kav'en-dish, _n._ tobacco moistened and pressed into
quadrangular cakes. [Possibly from the name of the original manufacturer.]

CAVERN, kav'[.e]rn, _n._ a deep hollow place in the earth.--_v.t._ to put
in a cavern: to hollow out, in the form of a cavern.--_adjs._ CAV'ERNED,
full of caverns: dwelling in a cavern; CAV'ERNOUS, hollow: full of
caverns.--_adv._ CAV'ERNOUSLY.--_adj._ CAVER'N[=U]LOUS, full of little
cavities. [Fr.,--L. _caverna_--_cavus_, hollow.]

CAVESSON, kav'es-on, _n._ a nose-band for a horse. [Fr.,--It.--L.
_capitia_, _capitium_, a head-covering.]

CAVETTO, ka-vet'to, _n._ a hollowed moulding whose curvature is the quarter
of a circle, used chiefly in cornices. [It.; dim. of _cavo_--L. _cavus_,
hollow.]

CAVIARE, CAVIAR, kav-i-är', or kav-i-[=a]r' (originally four syllables),
_n._ an article of food made from the salted roes of the sturgeon, &c.:
(_fig._) something whose flavour is too fine for the vulgar taste. [Prob.
the 16th-cent. It. _caviale_; the Turk, _kh[=a]vy[=a]r_ is prob. borrowed.]

CAVICORN, kav'i-korn, _adj._ hollow-horned, as a ruminant.--_n._ one of the
CAVICOR'NIA, a family contrasted with the solid-horned ruminants, or deer
(_Cervidæ_). [L. _cavus_, hollow, _cornu_, a horn.]

CAVIE, k[=a]v'i, _n._ a hen-coop or cage. [Dut. _kevie_; Ger. _käfig_.]

CAVIL, kav'il, _v.t._ to make empty, trifling objections: to use false
arguments:--_pr.p._ cav'illing; _pa.p._ cav'illed.--_n._ a frivolous
objection.--_ns._ CAVILL[=A]'TION, CAV'ILLING; CAV'ILLER. [O. Fr.
_caviller_--L. _cavill[=a]ri_, to practise jesting--_cavilla_, jesting.]

CAVITY, kav'it-i, _n._ a hollow place: hollowness: an opening.--_adj._
CAV'ITIED. [L. _cavitas_, _-tatem_--_cavus_, hollow.]

CAVO-RILIEVO, kä'v[=o]-r[=e]-ly[=a]'v[=o], _n._ a kind of relief in which
the highest surface is level with the plane of the original stone, which is
left round the outlines of the design.--Also INTAGLIO-RILIEVO and
COELANAGLYPHIC SCULPTURE. [It. _cavo_, hollow, _rilievo_, relief. See CAVE
and RELIEF.]

CAVORT, kav-ort', _v.i._ (_U.S. slang_) to curvet, bound. [Explained as a
corr. of CURVET.]

CAVY, k[=a]v'i, _n._ a genus of Rodents, best known by the domesticated
species, the common guinea-pig. [_Cabiai_, the native name in French
Guiana.]

CAW, kaw, _v.i._ to cry as a crow.--_n._ the cry of a crow--also KAW.--_n._
CAW'ING. [From the sound.]

CAWK, kawk, _n._ a miner's familiar name for heavy spar. [Prov. Eng.
_cauk_, CHALK.]

CAWKER. Same as CALKER.

CAXON, kak'son, _n._ a kind of wig formerly worn. [Origin obscure.]

CAXTON, kaks'ton, _n._ a book printed by William _Caxton_ (1422-91), the
first English printer: a kind of printing-type in imitation of Caxton's.

CAY, k[=a], _n._ a low islet, the same as KEY. [Sp. _cayo_.]

CAYENNE, k[=a]-en', CAYENNE-PEPPER, k[=a]-en'-pep'[.e]r, _n._ a very
pungent red pepper, made from several species of capsicum.--_adj._
CAYENNED', seasoned with cayenne. [Usually referred to _Cayenne_ in French
Guiana; but there is little doubt the word is Brazilian.]

CAYMAN, k[=a]'man, _n._ a local name loosely applied to various species of
alligator--to that of the Mississippi, and more frequently to others found
in tropical or subtropical America. [Sp. _caiman_, most prob. Carib.]

CAZIQUE, a form of CACIQUE.

CEASE, s[=e]s, _v.i._ to give over: to stop: to be at an end (with
_from_).--_v.t._ to put an end to.--_n._ (_Shak._) extinction.--_adj._
CEASE'LESS, without ceasing: incessant.--_adv._ CEASE'LESSLY.--_n._
CEAS'ING.--WITHOUT CEASE, continually. [Fr. _cesser_--L. _cess[=a]re_, to
give over--_ced[)e]re_, to yield, give up.]

CEBADILLA. See CEVADILLA.

CEBUS, s[=e]'bus, _n._ a genus of South American monkeys--CEBIDÆ
(seb'i-d[=e]) is sometimes applied to all the broad-nosed New-World monkeys
(Platyrrhini) with prehensile tails, in contrast to the Pithecidæ. [Gr.
_k[=e]bos_.]

CECIDOMYIA, ses-i-dom-[=i]'ya, _n._ a genus of dipterous (two-winged)
insects in the Tipularia (gnat and mosquito) division. [Gr. _k[=e]kis_,
_-idos_, juice.]

CECILS, s[=e]'silz, _n.pl._ minced meat, bread crumbs, onions, &c., made up
into balls and fried.

CECITY, s[=e]'si-ti, _n._ blindness. [L. _cæcitas_--_cæcus_, blind.]

CEDAR, s[=e]'dar, _n._ a large evergreen tree remarkable for the durability
and fragrance of its wood; applied also to many more or less similar trees,
as the Barbadoes cedar, properly a juniper, and the Bastard Barbadoes
cedar, properly a _Cedrela_ (used for canoes, cigar-boxes, blacklead
pencils).--_adj._ made of cedar.--_adjs._ C[=E]'DARED, covered with cedars;
C[=E]'DARN (_Milton_), pertaining to or made of cedar; C[=E]'DRINE,
belonging to the cedar-tree; C[=E]'DRY, obsolete form of C[=E]'DARY, having
the colour or properties of cedar. [L.--Gr. _kedros_.]

CEDE, s[=e]d, _v.t._ to yield or give up to another.--_v.i._ to give way.
[L. _ced[)e]re_, _cessum_, to yield, give up.]

CEDILLA, se-dil'la, _n._ a mark placed under the letter _c_ (thus _ç_),
esp. in French, to show that it is to have its soft sound of _s_, where one
would expect the hard, as before _a_, _o_, _u_. [Sp. (Fr. _cédille_, It.
_zediglia_), all from _z[=e]ta_, the Greek name of _z_.]

CEDRATE, s[=e]'dr[=a]t, _n._ the citron. [Fr.,--L. _citrus_.]

CEDRELA, sed'r[=e]-la, _n._ a tropical genus of _Meliaceæ_, allied to
mahogany, whose wood is popularly called cedar.--_adj._ CEDREL[=A]'CEOUS.
[Gr. _kedrelat[=e]_--_kedros_, cedar, _elat[=e]_, the silver fir.]

CEDULA, sed'[=u]-lä, _n._ a South American promissory-note or mortgage-bond
on lands. [Sp. Cf. SCHEDULE.]

CEE-SPRING, C-SPRING, s[=e]'-spring, _n._ a spring supporting the frame of
a carriage, in the shape of a C.

CEIL, CIEL, s[=e]l, _v.t._ to overlay the inner roof of a room, generally
to plaster it: to wainscot.--_n._ CEIL'ING, the inner roof of a room.
[Prob. conn. with Fr. _ciel_, It. _cielo_, Low L. _cælum_, a canopy.]

CELADON, sel'a-don, _n._ a pale-green colour. [Fr.]

CELANDINE, sel'an-d[=i]n, _n._ swallow-wort, the popular name (and
corruption) of _Chelidonium majus_, a perennial papaveraceous (poppy) herb,
so named because it was supposed to flower when the swallows appeared, and
to perish when they departed. [O. Fr. _celidoine_--Gr.
_chelidonion_--_chelid[=o]n_, a swallow.]

CELEBRATE, sel'e-br[=a]t, _v.t._ to make famous: to distinguish by solemn
ceremonies, as a festival or an event: to perform with proper rites and
ceremonies, as mass, the eucharist, marriage, &c.: to publish the praises
of.--_n._ CEL'EBRANT, one who celebrates: the principal officiant at the
holy communion.--_adj._ CEL'EBRATED, distinguished: famous.--_ns._
CELEBR[=A]'TION, act of celebrating any solemn ceremony, as the eucharist
(_high_, if with music, &c.; _low_, if without): an extolling;
CELEBR[=A]T'OR, one who celebrates; CELEB'RITY, the condition of being
celebrated: fame: notoriety: a person of distinction or fame. [L.
_celebr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_celeber_, frequented.]

CELERITY, sel-er'it-i, _n._ quickness: rapidity of motion. [Fr.,--L.
_celeritas_--_celer_, quick.]

CELERY, sel'er-i, _n._ a kitchen vegetable cultivated for its long blanched
succulent stalks. [Fr. _céleri_--L. and Gr. _sel[=i]non_, parsley.]

CELESTIAL, sel-est'yal, _adj._ heavenly: dwelling in heaven: in the visible
heavens.--_n._ an inhabitant of heaven.--_adv._ CELEST'IALLY.--THE
CELESTIAL EMPIRE, a name for China. [Through Fr. from L.
_coelestis_--_coelum_, heaven.]

CELESTINE, sel'es-t[=i]n, or sel-es'tin, _n._ one of an order of monks
following the rule of St Benedict, wearing a white garment with black hood
and scapulary, founded about 1254 by Peter da Murrone, who became Pope
_Celestine_ V. in 1294, and resigned after five years--'the great refusal'
of Dante.

CELESTINE, sel'es-tin, _n._ a mineral, native sulphate of strontia.--Also
CEL'ESTITE. [From its sky-blue colour.]

CELIAC, s[=e]'li-ak, _adj._ Same as COELIAC.

CELIBACY, sel'i-bas-i, or se-lib'as-i, _n._ a single life: an unmarried
state.--_adjs._ CELIBAT[=A]'RIAN, favouring celibacy; CEL'IBATE, living
single.--_n._ one unmarried, or not allowed to marry. [L. _coelebs_,
single.]

CELL, sel, _n._ a small room in a prison, monastery, &c.: a cave: a small
shut cavity: the grave: a unit-mass of living matter, whether rounded off
by itself, as in the simplest plants or animals, and in the youngest stage
of all organisms, or associated with other cells to form a higher
unity.--_adjs._ CELLED, having cells, cellular; CELLIF'EROUS, having or
producing cells; CELL'ULAR, CELL'ULATED, consisting of or containing
cells.--_n._ CELL'ULE, a little cell.--_adj._ CELLULIF'EROUS, having or
producing little cells.--_n._ CELL'ULOID, a hard elastic compound used for
ivory, obtained by hydraulic pressure from pyroxylin, mixed with camphor,
&c.--_adj._ CELL'ULOSE, containing cells.--_n._ the substance of which the
permanent cell-membranes of plants are composed. [O. Fr. _celle_--L.
_cella_, conn. with _cel[=a]re_, to cover.]

CELLA, sel'a, _n._ the body of the temple, as distinguished from the
portico, &c.

CELLAR, sel'ar, _n._ any underground room or vault: a cell underground,
where stores are kept, esp. wine, &c.--_v.t._ to store in a cellar.--_ns._
CELL'ARAGE, space for cellars: cellars: charge for storing in cellars;
CELL'ARER, CELL'ARIST, one who has charge of the cellar: an officer in a
monastery who has the charge of procuring and keeping the provisions;
CELL'ARET, an ornamental case for holding bottles; CELL'ARMAN, one who has
the care of a cellar.--_adj._ CELL'AROUS (_Dickens_), belonging to a
cellar: excavated: sunken. [O. Fr. _celier_--L. _cellarium_--_cella_.]

CELLO, chel'o, for VIOLONCELLO; sometimes written 'CELLO.--CELLIST,
'CELLIST, for VIOLONCELLIST.

CELLULARES, sel-[=u]-l[=a]'rez, _n.pl._ a name sometimes applied to the
_Cryptogamia_--properly only to the mosses and lower cryptogams.

CELT, selt, _n._ a cutting instrument of stone or bronze found in ancient
barrows. [Founded on _Celte_, perh. a misreading for _certe_ ('surely'), in
the Vulgate, Job, xix. 24, there being apparently no such Latin word as
_celtes_, a chisel.]

CELT, selt, _n._ one of the Celts, an Aryan race, now represented by the
Bretons, the Welsh, the Irish, and the Scottish Highlanders--also
Kelt.--_adj._ CELT'IC.--_ns._ CELT'ICISM, a Celtic idiom or custom;
CELTOM[=A]'NIA. [L. _Celtæ_; Gr. _Keltoi_ or _Keltai_.]

CEMENT, se-ment', _n._ anything that makes two bodies stick together:
mortar: a bond of union.--_v.t._ to unite with cement: to join
firmly.--_n._ CEMENT[=A]'TION, the act of cementing: the process by which
iron is turned into steel, glass into porcelain, &c.--done by surrounding
them with a cement or powder and exposing them to heat.--_adjs._
CEMENT'ATORY, CEMENTI'TIOUS, having the quality of cementing or uniting
firmly. [O. Fr. _ciment_--L. _cæmentum_, chip of stone used to fill up in
building a wall, _cædimentum_--_cæd[)e]re_, to cut.]

CEMETERY, sem'e-t[.e]r-i, _n._ a burying-ground. [Low L. _cæmeterium_--Gr.
_koim[=e]t[=e]rion_.]

CENACLE, sen'a-kl, _n._ a supper-room, esp. that in which the Last Supper
was eaten by Jesus and His disciples. [Fr. _cénacle_--L. _cenaculum_.]

CENOBITE. Same as COENOBITE.

CENOTAPH, sen'[=o]-taf, _n._ a sepulchral monument to one who is buried
elsewhere. [Fr.,--L.--Gr. _kenotaphion_--_kenos_, empty, and _taphos_, a
tomb.]

CENOZOIC, s[=e]-no-z[=o]'ik, _adj._ Same as CAINOZOIC.

CENSE, sens, _v.t._ to burn incense before: (_obs._) to think.--_n._
(_obs._) a public rate or tax: rank, condition. [See CENSUS.]

CENSER, sens'[.e]r, _n._ a pan in which incense is burned. [O. Fr.
_censier_, _encensier_ (mod. _encensoir_)--Low L. _incensorium_--L.
_incend[)e]re_, _incensum_, to burn.]

CENSOR, sen'sor, _n._ in ancient Rome, an officer who kept account of the
property of the citizens, imposed taxes, and watched over their morals: an
officer who examines books or newspapers before they are printed: one who
censures or blames.--_adjs._ CENS[=O]'RIAL, belonging to a censor, or to
the correction of public morals; CENS[=O]'RIOUS, expressing censure:
fault-finding--also CENS[=O]'RIAN.--_adv._ CENS[=O]'RIOUSLY.--_ns._
CENS[=O]'RIOUSNESS; CEN'SORSHIP, office of censor: time during which he
holds office.--CENSORSHIP OF THE PRESS, a regulation of certain
governments, by which books and newspapers must be examined by officers,
whose approval is necessary to their publication. [L.,--_cens[=e]re_, to
weigh, to estimate.]

CENSURE, sen'sh[=u]r, _n._ an unfavourable judgment: blame: reproof:
(_obs._) criticism, judgment generally.--_v.t._ to blame: to condemn as
wrong.--_adj._ CEN'SURABLE, deserving of censure: blamable.--_n._
CEN'SURABLENESS.--_adv._ CEN'SURABLY. [L. _cens[=u]ra_, an opinion, a
severe judgment--_cens[=e]re_, to estimate or judge.]

CENSUS, sen'sus, _n._ an official enumeration of the inhabitants of a
country, and of statistics relating to them.--_adj._ CEN'SUAL, relating to
or containing a census. [L. _census_, a register.]

CENT, sent, _n._ a hundred: an American coin--the hundredth part of a
dollar.--_ns._ CENT'AGE, rate by the hundred; CENT'AL, a weight of 100 lb.
proposed for general adoption, legalised in 1878.--PER CENT., by the
hundred. [L. _centum_, a hundred.]

CENTAUR, sen'tawr, _n._ a fabulous monster, half-man, half-horse.--_adj._
CENTAU'RIAN. [L.,--Gr. _kentauros_; ety. dub.]

CENTAURY, sen'taw-ri, _n._ an annual with pink or rose-coloured flowers,
possessing the tonic and other medicinal virtues of gentian, esteemed in
medicine since the days of Galen.

CENTENARY, sen'tin-ar-i (also sometimes sen-t[=e]n'ar-i and even
sen-ten'ar-i), _n._ a hundred: a century or hundred years.--_adj._
pertaining to a hundred.--_ns._ CENTEN[=A]'RIAN, one a hundred years old;
CENTEN[=A]'RIANISM; CENTENIER (sen'ten-[=e]r), a centurion: a
police-officer in Jersey. [L.,--_centeni_, a hundred each--_centum_.]

CENTENNIAL, sen-ten'i-al, _adj._ happening once in a hundred years.--_n._ a
hundredth anniversary. [Coined from L. _centum_, and _annus_, a year.]

CENTER. See CENTRE.

CENTERING, sen't[.e]r-ing, _n._ (_archit._) the framework upon which an
arch or vault of stone, brick, or iron is supported during its
construction.

CENTESIMAL, sen-tes'i-mal, _adj._ hundredth.--_adv._ CENTES'IMALLY. [L.
_centesimus_--_centum_.]

CENTIFOLIOUS, sen-ti-f[=o]'li-us, _adj._ hundred-leaved.

CENTIGRADE, sen'ti-gr[=a]d, _adj._ having a hundred degrees: divided into a
hundred degrees, as the centigrade thermometer constructed by Celsius
(1701-44), in which freezing-point is zero and boiling-point is 100° (for
its relation to the Fahrenheit scale, see THERMOMETER). [L. _centum_, and
_gradus_, a step, a degree.]

CENTIGRAMME, sen'ti-gram, _n._ in the Metric System, the hundredth part of
a gramme, or .1543248 of a gr. troy. [Fr.,--L. _centum_, a hundred, and
GRAMME.]

CENTILITRE, sen'ti-l[=e]-tr, _n._ the hundredth part of a litre, a little
more than 6/10ths of a cubic inch. [Fr.,--L. _centum_, a hundred, and
LITRE.]

CENTIME, sen-t[=e]m', _n._ the hundredth part of anything, esp. a French
coin, the hundredth part of a franc. [Fr.,--L. _centum_, a hundred.]

CENTIMETRE, sen'ti-m[=e]-tr, _n._ a lineal measure, the hundredth part of a
metre--0.3937 inches. [Fr.,--L. _centum_, a hundred, _metrum_, Gr.
_metron_, a measure.]

CENTINEL. Same as SENTINEL.

CENTIPEDE, sen'ti-p[=e]d, _n._ a general name for the members of one of the
orders of the class _Myriapoda_, being segmented animals bearing jointed
appendages, having a well-defined head furnished with feelers and jaws, and
breathing by means of air-tubes or tracheæ. [L. _centum_, and _pes_,
_pedis_, a foot.]

CENTNER, sent'ner, _n._ a common name on the Continent for a hundredweight.

CENTO, sen'to, _n._ a name applied to literary trivialities in the form of
poems manufactured by putting together distinct verses or passages of one
author, or of several authors, so as to make a new meaning: a composition
formed by joining scraps from other authors: expressing contempt, a mere
string of commonplace phrases and quotations:--_pl._ usually
CEN'TOS.--_ns._ CEN'TOIST; CEN'TONISM, CEN'TOISM. [L. _cento_, Gr.
_kentr[=o]n_, patchwork.]

CENTRE, CENTER, sen't[.e]r, _n._ the middle point of anything, esp. a
circle or sphere: the middle: the point toward which all things move or are
drawn: the chief leader of an organisation--head-centre: the men of
moderate political opinions in the French Chamber, sitting right in front
of the president, with extreme men on the right and on the left--further
subdivisions are RIGHT-CENTRE and LEFT-CENTRE: the Ultramontane party in
Germany.--_v.t._ to place on or collect to a centre.--_v.i._ to be placed
in the middle:--_pr.p._ cen'tring, cen'tering; _pa.p._ cen'tred,
cen'tered.--_adj._ CEN'TRAL, belonging to the centre, principal, dominant:
belonging to a nerve-centre, of affections caused by injury to the brain or
spinal cord.--_ns._ CENTRALIS[=A]'TION, CEN'TRALISM, the tendency to
administer by the sovereign or central government matters which would be
otherwise under local management.--_v.t._ CEN'TRALISE, to draw to a
centre.--_n._ CENTRAL'ITY, central position.--_advs._ CEN'TRALLY,
CEN'TRICALLY.--_ns._ CEN'TRE-BIT, a joiner's tool, turning on a centre, for
boring circular holes--one of the chief tools of the burglar;
CEN'TRE-BOARD, a shifting keel, fitted to drop below and in line with the
keel proper in order to increase or diminish the draught of a boat--much
used in United States racing yachts; CEN'TRE-PIECE, an ornament for the
middle of a table, ceiling, &c.--_adjs._ CEN'TRIC, CEN'TRICAL, relating to,
placed in, or containing the centre.--_ns._ CEN'TRICALNESS, CENTRIC'ITY;
CEN'TRUM, the body of a vertebra.--CENTRAL FIRE, said of a cartridge in
which the fulminate is placed in the centre of the base, as opposed to _rim
fire_; CENTRAL FORCES, forces whose action is to cause a moving body to
tend towards a fixed point called the centre of force.--CENTRE OF
ATTRACTION, the point to which bodies tend by the force of gravity; CENTRE
OF BUOYANCY, or DISPLACEMENT, the point in an immersed body at which the
resultant vertical pressure may be supposed to act; CENTRE OF GRAVITY, a
certain point, invariably situated with regard to the body, through which
the resultant of the attracting forces between the earth and its several
molecules always passes; CENTRE OF INERTIA, or MASS, the centre of a set of
parallel forces acting on all the particles of a body, each force being
proportional to the mass of the particle on which it acts; CENTRE OF
OSCILLATION, the point in a body occupied by that particle which is
accelerated and retarded to an equal amount, and which therefore moves as
if it were a single pendulum unconnected with the rest of the body; CENTRE
OF PERCUSSION, the point in which the direction of a blow, given to a body,
intersects the plane in which the fixed axis and the centre of inertia lie,
making the body begin to rotate about a fixed axis, without causing any
pressure on the axis; CENTRE OF PRESSURE, the point at which the direction
of a single force, which is equivalent to the fluid pressure on the plane
surface, meets the surface. [Fr.,--L. _centrum_--Gr. _kentron_, a sharp
point.]

CENTRIFUGAL, sen-trif'[=u]-gal, _adj._ relating to the force directed
towards the centre of curvature constantly required to keep a body moving
in a curve instead of in its natural straight line: (_bot._) applied to an
inflorescence when the development proceeds from the apex towards the base
of the axis or leaf, as opposed to _centripetal_, when it is from the base
upwards towards the apex.--_n._ CEN'TRIFUGE, a centrifugal machine. [L.
_centrum_, and _fug-[)e]re_, to flee from.]

CENTRIPETAL, sen-trip'et-al, _adj._ of a force impelling a body towards
some point as a centre. [L. _centrum_, and _pet-[)e]re_, to seek.]

CENTROBARIC, sen-tro-bar'ik, _adj._ relating to the centre of gravity. [L.
_centrum_, and Gr. _baros_, weight.]

CENTRODE, sen'tr[=o]d, _n._ a locus traced out by the successive positions
of an instantaneous centre of pure rotation.

CENTUMVIR, sen-tum'vir, _n._ one of the Roman judges chosen annually for
civil suits, originally 105 in number (three from each of the thirty-five
tribes):--_pl._ CENTUM'VIR[=I].--_n._ CENTUM'VIRATE. [L. _centum_, a
hundred, and _vir_, a man.]

CENTUPLE, sen't[=u]-pl, _adj._ hundredfold.--_v.t._ CENT[=U]'PLICATE, to
multiply a hundred times.--_n._ CENTUPLIC[=A]'TION. [L.
_centuplex_--_centum_, and _plic[=a]re_, to fold.]

CENTURY, sen't[=u]-ri, _n._ a hundred, or something consisting of a hundred
in number, as sonnets, &c.: a hundred years.--_adj._ CENT[=U]'RIAL.--_ns._
CENT[=U]'RI[=A]TOR, the centuriators of Magdeburg were a group of Reformed
divines who in the 16th century compiled a church history in 13 vols., each
volume covering a century; CENT[=U]'RION, among the Romans, the commander
of a hundred men.--CENTURY PLANT (see AGAVE). [L. _centuria_--_centum_.]

CEORL, churl, _n._ before the Norman Conquest an ordinary freeman not of
noble birth. [A.S.]

CEPHALASPIS, sef-a-las'pis, _n._ a genus of fossil Ganoid fishes found in
the Upper Silurian and Devonian measures. [Gr. _kephal[=e]_, the head,
_aspis_, a shield.]

CEPHALIC, se-fal'ik, _adj._ belonging to the head--also
CEPHALIS'TIC.--_ns._ CEPHALAG'RA, gout in the head; CEPHALAL'GIA,
CEPH'ALGY, headache.--_adjs._ CEPHALAL'GIC; CEPH'ALATE, having a head, as a
mollusc.--_n._ CEPHAL[=I]'TIS, inflammation of the brain.--_adjs._
CEPH'ALOID, in the form of the head: spherical.--_ns._ CEPH'ALO-TH[=O]'RAX,
the anterior division of the body in arthropods; CEPHALOT'OMY, the
dissection of the head.--_adj._ CEPH'ALOUS, having a head. [Gr.
_kephalikos_--_kephal[=e]_, the head.]

CEPHALOPODA, sef-al-op'od-a, _n.pl._ the highest class of molluscs, usually
large animals, exclusively marine, with well-developed head region, but
having the ventral surface grown round the mouth and split up into arms
bearing suckers--more commonly _cuttlefish_.--_adj._ CEPH'ALOPOD. [Gr.
_kephal[=e]_, the head, _pous_, _podos_, the foot.]

CEPHALOPTERA, sef-a-lop't[.e]r-a, _n._ a name formerly used for a genus of
rays. [Gr. _kephal[=e]_, the head, _ptera_, wings.]

CERAMIC, se-ram'ik, _adj._ pertaining to pottery. [Gr. _keramos_, potter's
earth.]

CERASINE, ser'a-sin, _n._ the insoluble portion of the gum which exudes
from the cherry, &c. [L. _cerasus_, Gr. _kerasos_, the cherry-tree.]

CERASTES, se-ras't[=e]z, _n._ a genus of poisonous snakes having a horny
process over each eye. [L.; Gr. _kerast[=e]s_--_keras_, a horn.]

CERATE, s[=e]'r[=a]t, _n._ a compound of wax with other oily or medicinal
substances in such proportions as to form a stiff ointment.--_adj._
C[=E]'RATED.--_n._ CERO'MANCY, divination from figures produced by melted
wax when dropped into water. [L. _cer[=a]re_, _cer[=a]tum_, to cover with
wax, _cera_, wax.]

CERATITIS, ser-a-t[=i]'tis, _n._ inflammation of the cornea.--Also
KERAT[=I]'TIS.

CERATODE, ser'a-t[=o]d, _n._ the horny skeletal substance of sponges--also
CER'ATOSE.--_adjs._ CERAT'ODOUS, CER'ATOSE.

CERATOID, ser'a-toid, _adj._ horny.

CERAUNIC, se-raw'nik, _adj._ pertaining to, or produced by, thunder.--_ns._
CERAU'NITE, a belemnite; CERAU'NOSCOPE, an apparatus for imitating thunder
and lightning in ancient mysteries. [Gr. _keraunos_, a thunderbolt.]

CERBERUS, ser'b[.e]r-us, _n._ (_myth._) the monster that guarded the
entrance to Hades, a dog with three, according to some a hundred,
heads.--_adj._ CERB[=E]'RIAN. [L.--Gr. _Kerberos_.]

CERCARIA, ser-k[=a]'ri-a, _n._ the technical name applied to an embryonic
form of many flukes.--_adj._ CERC[=A]'RIAN. [Gr. _kerkos_, a tail.]

CERE, s[=e]r, _v.t._ to cover with wax.--_n._ the bare waxlike patch at the
base of the upper part of the beak in birds.--_adj._ CER[=A]'CEOUS, of or
like wax.--_ns._ CER[=A]'GO, a wax-like substance (bee-bread) used by bees
as food; CERE'CLOTH, CERE'MENT, a cloth dipped in melted wax in which to
wrap a dead body: a winding-sheet or grave-clothes generally.--_adjs._
C[=E]'REOUS, waxy; C[=E]'RIC.--_ns._ C[=E]'RIN, C[=E]'RINE, the portion of
wax which dissolves in boiling alcohol: a waxy substance obtained by
boiling grated cork in alcohol; C[=E]'ROGRAPH, a writing on wax: an
encaustic painting.--_adjs._ CEROGRAPH'IC, -AL.--_ns._ CEROG'RAPHIST;
CEROG'RAPHY, the art of writing or engraving on wax.--_adj._ CEROPLAS'TIC,
modelled or moulded in wax.--_n._ the art of modelling in wax.--_n._
CER'OSINE, a wax-like substance produced on the surface of certain species
of sugar-cane. [L. _cera_, cog. with Gr. _k[=e]ros_, wax; Gr. _graphein_,
to write, _plassein_, to mould.]

CEREAL. See CERES.

CEREBRUM, ser'e-brum, _n._ the front and larger part of the brain.--_adjs._
CEREBELL'AR, CEREBELL'OUS.--_n._ CEREBELL'UM, the hinder and lower part of
the brain.--_adj._ CER'EBRAL, pertaining to the cerebrum.--_ns._
CER'EBRALISM, the theory that all mental operations originate in the
cerebrum; CER'EBRALIST.--_v.i._ CER'EBRATE, to show brain action.--_n._
CEREBR[=A]'TION, action of the brain, conscious or unconscious, marked by
molecular changes in the cerebrum.--_adjs._ CER'EBRIC, cerebral;
CEREB'RIFORM, brain-shaped.--_ns._ CER'EBRIN, a name given to several
nitrogenous non-phosphorised substances obtained from the brain;
CEREBR[=I]'TIS, inflammation of the cerebrum.--_adj._ CER'EBRO-SP[=I]N'AL,
relating to the brain and spinal cord together.--CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES, the
two great divisions of the cerebrum. [L. _cerebrum_, the brain; prob. cog.
with Gr. _kara_, the head, _kranion_, the cranium.]

CEREMONY, ser'e-mo-ni, _n._ a sacred rite: the outward form, religious or
otherwise: any empty form without inwardness: pomp or state; a portent or
omen.--_adj._ CEREM[=O]'NIAL, relating to ceremony.--_n._ outward form: a
system of ceremonies.--_n._ CEREM[=O]'NIALISM, adherence to outward
form.--_adv._ CEREM[=O]'NIALLY.--_adj._ CEREM[=O]'NIOUS, full of ceremony:
particular in observing forms: precise.--_adv._ CEREM[=O]'NIOUSLY.--_n._
CEREM[=O]NIOUSNESS.--MASTER OF CEREMONIES, the person who directs the form
and order of the ceremonies to be observed on some public occasion.
[Fr.--L. _cærimonia_, sanctity.]

CERES, s[=e]'r[=e]z, _n._ the Roman name for the Greek Dem[=e]t[=e]r,
goddess of tillage and corn.--_adj._ C[=E]'REAL, relating to corn or edible
grain.--_n.pl._ C[=E]'REALS, the grains used as food, such as wheat,
barley, &c. [L. prob. from root of _cre[=a]re_, to create.]

CEREUS, s[=e]'ri-us, _n._ a large genus of cactuses, including some of the
most imposing forms. [L., 'waxen.']

CERGE, s[.e]rj, _n._ a large wax-candle burned before the altar.--Also
CIERGE, SERGE. [O. Fr.,--L. _cereus_--_cera_, wax.]

CERINTHIAN, ser-in'thi-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Cerinthus_, one of the
earliest heretics in the Christian Church, against whose crude Gnosticism
the Gospel of John was written, according to Irenæus.

CERIPH. Same as SERIF.

CERISE, ser-[=e]z', _n._ and _adj._ a light and clear red colour. [Fr.,
'cherry.']

CERIUM, s[=e]'ri-um, _n._ a rare metal found in the mineral C[=E]'RITE,
which is its hydrated silicate. [Named from the plant _Ceres_.]

CERN, s[.e]rn (_Shak._). CONCERN.

CEROMANCY. See CERATE.

CEROON. See SEROON.

CEROPLASTIC. See CERE.

CERTAIN, s[.e]r't[=a]n, or s[.e]r'tin, _adj._ sure: not to be doubted:
resolved: fixed: regular: inevitable: some: one.--_advs._ CER'TAINLY,
(_Scot._) CER'TY, CER'TIE.--_ns._ CER'TITUDE, CER'TAINTY.--'A CERTAIN
PERSON,' implying some degree of contempt; A LADY OF A CERTAIN AGE, of an
age best not stated accurately--at least no longer young.--FOR CERTAIN,
assuredly.--MORAL CERTAINTY, a conviction so justifiable that one is
morally entitled to act on it. [O. Fr.,--L. _certus_--_cern-[)e]re_, to
decide.]

CERTES, s[.e]r't[=e]z, _adv._ certainly: in sooth. [Fr.]

CERTIFICATE, s[.e]r-tif'i-k[=a]t, _n._ a written declaration of some fact:
a testimonial of character or definite statement of qualifications.--_v.t._
to give a certificate.--_ns._ CERTIFIC[=A]'TION; CERTIF'ICATORY, a
certificate--also _adj._--_n._ CER'TIFIER, one who certifies.--_v.t._
CER'TIFY, to make known as certain: to inform: to declare in
writing:--_pr.p._ cer'tifying; _pa.p._ cer'tified. [Fr. _certificat_--L.
_certific[=a]re_, _certus_, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CERTIORARI, s[.e]r-shi-o-r[=a]'ri, _n._ the writ by which, since the
abolition of imprisonment for debt and the consequent disuse of the
better-known writ, _habeas corpus_, causes are removed from inferior courts
of record into the High Court of Justice. [Low L., 'be informed
of'--_certior_, comp. of _certus_, certain.]

CERULEAN, se-r[=u]'le-an, _adj._ sky-blue: dark-blue; sea-green.--_adj._
CER[=U]'LEOUS. [L. _cæruleus_.]

CERULEIN, s[.e]r-[=u]'l[=e]-in, _n._ a coal-tar colour chiefly used in
dyeing cotton fabrics, producing fast olive-green shades.

CERUMEN, se-r[=u]'men, _n._ the yellow waxy matter secreted in the
ear.--_adj._ CER[=U]'MINOUS. [L. _cera_, wax.]

CERUSE, s[=e]'r[=oo]s, or ser-[=u]s', _n._ white-lead, the native carbonate
of lead.--_n._ C[=E]'RUSITE. [Fr.,--L. _cerussa_, conn. with _cera_, wax.]

CERVICAL, s[.e]r'vi-kal, _adj._ belonging to the neck. [Fr.,--L. _cervix_,
_cervicis_, the neck.]

CERVINE, s[.e]r'v[=i]n, _adj._ relating to deer. [L. _cervinus_, _cervus_,
a stag.]

CESAREAN. See CÆSAREAN.

CESAREVITCH. See CZAR.

CESPITOSE, ses'pi-t[=o]s, _adj._ turfy: growing in tufts.--Also CES'PITOUS.
[L. _cespes_, _cespitis_, turf.]

CESS, ses, _n._ a tax, a local rate.--_v.t._ to impose a tax.--OUT OF ALL
CESSE (_Shak._), excessively, immoderately. [Shortened from ASSESS.]

CESSATION, ses-[=a]'shun, _n._ a ceasing or stopping: a rest: a pause.
[Fr.,--L. _cessation-em_. See CEASE.]

CESSE, ses, _v.i._ (_Spens._). Same as CEASE.

CESSION, sesh'un, _n._ a yielding up.--_n._ CES'SIONARY, one to whom an
assignment has been legally made.--CESSIO BON[=O]RUM (_Scots law_), before
1880 a debtor's surrender of his estate to his creditors in return for a
judicial protection from imprisonment in respect of his debts. [Fr.--L.
_cession-em_. See CEDE.]

CESSPOOL, ses'p[=oo]l, _n._ a pool or hollow in which filthy water
collects. [Acc. to Skeat, from Celt. _soss-pool_, a pool into which foul
messes flow. Cf. Scot. _soss_, a mixed dirty mess.]

CESTOID, ses'toid, _n._ one of a family of flat worms of internal parasitic
habit, having a long strap-like body divided into numerous segments: a
tapeworm.--Also CESTOID'EAN. [L. _cestus_, Gr. _kestos_, a girdle, a strap,
and _eidos_, form.]

CESTRACION, ses-tr[=a]'si-on, _n._ a generic name for the hammer-headed
sharks. [Formed from Gr. _kestra_, a weapon.]

CESTUI, sest'w[=e], _n._ any person who--in such phrases as CESTUI QUE
TRUST, a person entitled to the benefit of a trust, a beneficiary in Scots
law phraseology. [O. Fr.]

[Illustration]

CESTUS, ses'tus, _n._ the girdle of Venus, which had power to awaken love:
an ancient boxing-glove loaded with lead or iron. [L.--Gr. _kestos_, a
girdle.]

CESURA. See CÆSURA.

CESURE, s[=e]'z[=u]r, _n._ a breaking off: (_Spens._) a cæsura.

CETACEA, se-t[=a]'shi-a, _n.pl._ an order of mammals of aquatic habit and
fish-like form, including the Toothed whales, or _Odontoceti_, and the
Baleen whales, or _Mystacoceti_. To the former belong the Sperm whales, the
Bottlenose, the genus Platanista and its allies, and the great family of
Dolphins; to the latter, the Right Whale (_Balæna_), the Humpbacks, and the
Rorquals.--_n._ CET[=A]'CEAN.--_adj._ CET[=A]'CEOUS.--_n._ CETOL'OGY, that
part of zoology which treats of whales. [L.,--Gr. _k[=e]tos_, any
sea-monster.]

CETEOSAURUS, set-e-o-saw'rus, _n._ a large dinosaurian reptile belonging to
the Jurassic system. [Gr. _k[=e]tos_, whale, _sauros_, lizard.]

CEVADILLA, sev-a-dil'a, _n._ the dark acrid seeds of a Mexican bulbous
plant of the lily family, yielding veratrin, formerly used as an
anthelmintic: the plant itself.--Also CEBADILL'A. [Sp.,--L. _cib[=a]re_, to
feed, _cibus_, food.]

CEYLONESE, s[=e]-lon-[=e]z', _adj._ of or belonging to _Ceylon_.--_n._ a
native of Ceylon.

CHABLIS, shab'l[=e], _n._ a celebrated white Burgundy wine made at
_Chablis_, near Auxerre, in France.

CHABOUK, tschä'b[=oo]k, _n._ a Persian horsewhip. [Pers.]

CHACE. See CHASE (1).

CHACK, chak, _n._ a snack or slight hasty meal. [Imit.]

CHACMA, chak'ma, _n._ a South African baboon.

CHACO. Same as Shako.

CHACONNE, shak-on', _n._ an old dance, with slow movement, the music, a
series of variations on a ground bass, mostly eight bars in length,
appearing in sonatas as well as ballets. [Fr.,--Sp. _chacona_--Basque
_chucun_, pretty.]

CHAD, shad, _n._ a kind of fish. [See SHAD.]

CHÆTODON, k[=e]'to-don, _n._ a typical genus of a family of bony fishes,
known as Squamipennes. [Gr. _chait[=e]_, hair, _odous_, _odont-_, tooth.]

CHÆTOPOD, k[=e]'to-pod, _n._ a class of worms including familiar types like
the Earthworm, the Fisherman's Lobworm, and the Sea-mouse--often included
under the title of Annelids or ringed worms. [Gr. _chait[=e]_, hair, and
_pous_, _pod-_, foot.]

CHAFE, ch[=a]f, _v.t._ to make hot by rubbing: to fret or wear by rubbing:
to cause to fret or rage (with _against_, _at_).--_v.i._ to fret or
rage.--_n._ heat caused by rubbing: rage: passion.--_ns._ CHAF'ER (_obs._),
a chafing-dish, a saucepan; CHAF'ING-DISH, a dish or vessel in which
anything is made hot: a kind of portable grate; CHAF'ING-GEAR, mats,
spun-yarn, battens, &c., put upon the rigging and spars of a ship to
prevent their being chafed. [Fr. _chauffer_--L.
_calefac[)e]re_--_cal[=e]re_, to be hot, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CHAFER, ch[=a]f'[.e]r, _n._ a kind of beetle, the cockchafer. [A.S.
_cefer_; cog. with Dut. _kever_, Ger. _käfer_.]

CHAFF, chaf, _n._ a general name for the husks of corn or other grain as
threshed or winnowed: refuse, or worthless matter: light banter,
badinage.--_v.t._ to banter, or tease, by some raillery.--_ns._
CHAFF'-CUT'TER, CHAFF'-EN'GINE, a machine for cutting straw or hay into
chaff.--_n._ and _p.adj._ CHAFF'ING.--_adv._ CHAFF'INGLY.--_adjs._
CHAFF'LESS; CHAFF'Y. [A.S. _ceaf_; cf. Dut. _kaf_.]

CHAFFER, chaf'[.e]r, _v.t._ to buy.--_v.i._ to bargain: to haggle about the
price.--_ns._ CHAFF'ERER, a haggler about the price; CHAFF'ERY, buying and
selling: (_Spens._) haggling. [M. E. _chapfare_, a bargain, from A.S.
_ceap_, price, _faru_, way.]

CHAFFINCH, chaf'insh, _n._ a little song-bird of the finch family. [Said to
delight in _chaff_. See FINCH.]

CHAFFRON. See CHAMFRAIN.

CHAFT, chaft, _n._ (_Scot._ and _Northern English_) the jaw. [Ice.
_kjaptr_; cf. Sw. _käft_, Dan. _kieft_.]

CHAGAN, kag-än', _n._ an early form of KHAN.

CHAGRIN, sha-gr[=e]n', _n._ that which wears or gnaws the mind: vexation:
annoyance.--_v.t._ to vex or annoy.--_p.adj._ CHAGRINED'. [Fr. _chagrin_,
shagreen, rough skin, ill-humour.]

CHAIN, ch[=a]n, _n._ a series of links or rings passing through one
another: a number of things coming after each other: anything that binds: a
connected course or train of events: in surveying, often called Gunter's
chain, a measure of 100 links, 66 feet long (10 sq. chains make an acre):
(_pl._) fetters, bonds, confinement generally.--_v.t._ to fasten: to
fetter: to restrain: (_Shak._) to embrace.--_ns._ CHAIN'-ARM'OUR,
chain-mail; CHAIN'-BOLT, a large bolt used to secure the chain-plates to
the ship's side; CHAIN'-BRIDGE, a bridge suspended on chains: a
suspension-bridge; CHAIN'-C[=A]'BLE, a cable composed of iron
links.--_p.adj._ CHAINED, bound or fastened, as with a chain: fitted with a
chain.--_n._ CHAIN'-GANG, a gang of convicts chained together.--_adj._
CHAIN'LESS, without chains: [Illustration] unfettered.--_ns._ CHAIN'LET, a
small chain; CHAIN'-MAIL, mail or armour made of iron links connected
together, much used in Europe in the 12th and 13th centuries;
CHAIN'-MOULD'ING, moulding in the form of a chain; CHAIN'-PIER, a pier
supported by chains like a chain-bridge.--_n.pl._ CHAIN'-PLATES, on
shipboard, iron plates bolted below the channels to serve as attachments
for the dead-eyes, through which the standing rigging or shrouds and
back-stays are rove and secured.--_ns._ CHAIN'-PUMP, a pump consisting of
buckets or plates fastened to an endless iron chain, and used for raising
water; CHAIN'-RULE, an arithmetical rule, so called from the terms of the
problem being stated as equations, and connected, as if by a chain, so as
to obtain by one operation the same result as would be obtained by a number
of different operations in simple proportion: the rule for solving problems
by compound proportion; CHAIN'-SHOT, two bullets or half-bullets fastened
together by a chain, used formerly in naval engagements to destroy rigging,
now replaced by case-shot and shrapnel-shell; CHAIN'-STITCH, a peculiar
kind of stitch resembling the links of a chain; CHAIN'-WORK, work
consisting of threads, cords, &c., wrought with open spaces like the links
of a chain: network. [Fr. _chaine_--L. _cat[=e]na_.]

CHAIR, ch[=a]r, _n._ a movable seat for one, with a back to it: a covered
vehicle for one person, as a sedan-chair: the seat or office of one in
authority, as a judge, a bishop, or the person presiding over any
meeting--hence 'to take the chair' = to assume the place of president; 'to
address the chair' = to direct one's speech to the chairman; 'to support
the chair' = to uphold the authority of the chairman--often, when
endangered in a public meeting, asserted by cries of '_Chair!_': the seat
from which a professor delivers his lectures, the office or function of a
professor--'socialists of the chair' = mere doctrinaire or theoretical
advocates of socialism: cast-iron supports for rails under the permanent
way in a railway, held by wooden wedges, and spiked on to transverse wooden
sleepers.--_v.t._ to place in a seat of authority: to carry publicly in
triumph.--_n._ CHAIR'-BED, a kind of chair capable of being turned into a
bed.--_n.pl._ CHAIR'-DAYS (_Shak._), used figuratively to denote the
evening of life.--_ns._ CHAIR'MAN, the man who takes the chair, or presides
at an assembly or meeting: one who carries a sedan or Bath chair;
CHAIR'MANSHIP; CHAIR'-OR'GAN, a corruption of choir-organ (q.v.);
CHAIR'WOMAN. [Fr. _chaire_--L.--Gr. _kathedra_.]

CHAISE, sh[=a]z, _n._ a light open carriage for one or more persons: a
travelling carriage (see POST-CHAISE).--_adj._ CHAISE'LESS.--_n._
CHAISE-LONGUE, a couch. [Fr., a Parisian pronunciation of _chaire_. See
CHAIR.]

CHAL, chal, _n._ fellow: person:--_fem._ CHAI. [Gipsy.]

CHALCEDONY, kal-sed'[=o]-ni, or kal'-, _n._ a beautiful mineral of the
quartz family, consisting of quartz with some admixture of opal--it is
generally translucent, has a somewhat waxy lustre, and is in colour
generally white or bluish-white.--_adj._ CHALCEDON'IC.--_n._ CHALCED'ONYX,
an agate formed of a white opaque chalcedony alternating with a grayish
translucent chalcedony. [Prob. from _Chalcedon_, in Asia Minor.]

CHALCOGRAPHY, kal-kog'ra-fi, _n._ the art of engraving on copper or
brass.--_ns._ CHALCOG'RAPHER, CHALCOG'RAPHIST. [Gr. _chalkos_, copper,
_graphein_, to write.]

CHALDAIC, kal-d[=a]'ik, CHALDEE, kal'd[=e], _adj._ relating to
_Chaldea_.--_n._ the language of the Chaldeans.--_n._ CHAL'D[=A]ISM, a
Chaldaic idiom.--_adj._ CHALD[=E]'AN, Chaldaic.--_n._ a native of Chaldea.

CHALDER, chawl'd[.e]r, _n._ an old Scotch dry measure, containing 16 bolls.
[Prob. a form of CHALDRON.]

CHALDRON, chawl'drun, _n._ an old coal-measure, holding 36 heaped bushels
(= 25½ cwt.). [Fr. _chaudron_. See CAULDRON.]

CHALET, sha-l[=a]', _n._ a summer hut used by Swiss herdsmen among the
Alps: a urinal. [Fr.]

CHALICE, chal'is, _n._ a cup or bowl: a communion-cup.--_adj._ CHAL'ICED,
cup-like. [Fr. _calice_--L. _calix_, _calicis_; Gr. _kylix_, a cup. CALYX
is a different word, but from the same root.]

CHALK, chawk, _n._ the well-known white substance, a carbonate of
lime.--_v.t._ to rub or manure with chalk.--_v.i._ to mark with chalk: in a
tavern, to write the score with chalk.--_ns._ CHALK'INESS; CHALK'-PIT, a
pit in which chalk is dug; CHALK'-STONE, a stone or piece of chalk: (_pl._)
the white concretions formed round the joints in chronic gout.--_adj._
CHALK'Y.--CHALK FOR CHEESE, a small price for a good article.--CHALKING THE
DOOR, in Scotland, a form of warning tenants to remove from burghal
tenements.--CHALK OUT, to trace out, as with chalk, to plan.--BY A LONG
CHALK, by a considerable distance, referring to the habit of scoring with
chalk. [A.S. _cealc_, like Fr. _chaux_, is from L. _calx_, limestone.]

CHALLENGE, chal'enj, _v.t._ to call on one to settle a matter by fighting
or by any kind of contest: to claim as one's own: to accuse; to object
to.--_n._ a summons to a contest of any kind, but esp. a duel: a calling of
any one or anything in question: exception to a juror: the demand of a
sentry.--_adj._ CHALL'ENGEABLE, that may be challenged.--_n._ CHALL'ENGER,
one who challenges to a combat of any kind: a claimant: one who objects,
calls in question. [O. Fr. _chalenge_, a dispute, a claim--L. _calumnia_, a
false accusation--_calvi_, _calv[)e]re_, to deceive.]

CHALLIS, shal'is, or shal'i, _n._ a fine fabric of silk and worsted used
for ladies' dresses. [Fr.]

CHALUMEAU, shal-[=u]-m[=o]', _n._ a musical instrument: a shepherd's pipe.
[Fr.,--O. Fr. _chalemel_--Low L. _calamellus_, dim. of _calamus_, a pipe, a
reed.]

CHALYBEAN, ka-lib'[=e]-an, _adj._ (_Milton_) forged by the Chalybes: well
tempered.--_adj._ CHALYB'E[=A]TE, containing iron.--_n._ a water or other
liquor containing iron. [Gr. _chalyps_, _chalybos_, steel, so called from
the _Chalybes_, a nation in Pontus famous for steel.]

CHALYBITE, kal'i-b[=i]t, _n._ native iron protocarbonate--siderite.

CHAM, kam, _n._ an obsolete form of KHAN.

CHAMADE, sham'ad, _n._ a signal inviting a parley. [Fr.]

CHAMBER, ch[=a]m'b[.e]r, _n._ an apartment: the place where an assembly
meets: an assembly or body of men met for some purpose, as a chamber of
commerce: a hall of justice: a compartment: a cavity: the back end of the
bore of a gun.--_v.t._ to put in a chamber: to confine.--_v.i._ to be
wanton.--_ns._ CHAM'BER-COUN'CIL (_Shak._), a private or secret council;
CHAM'BER-COUN'SEL, -COUN'SELLOR, a counsel who gives his advice privately,
but does not plead in court.--_adj._ CHAM'BERED.--_ns._ CHAM'BERER, a man
of intrigue: (_Shak._) a gallant; CHAM'BER-FELL'OW, one occupying the same
chamber.--_n.pl._ CHAM'BER-HANG'INGS (_Shak._), the hangings or tapestry of
a chamber.--_ns._ CHAM'BERING (_B._), lewd behaviour; CHAM'BER-LYE
(_Shak._), urine; CHAM'BER-MAID, a female servant who has the care of
bedrooms; CHAM'BER-POT, a necessary bedroom vessel--often merely CHAM'BER;
CHAM'BER-PRAC'TICE, the business of a chamber-counsellor (q.v.). [Fr.
_chambre_--L. _camera_--Gr. _kamara_, a vault, a room.]

CHAMBERLAIN, ch[=a]m'b[.e]r-l[=a]n, or -lin, _n._ an officer appointed by a
king or nobleman, or by a corporation, to perform domestic and ceremonial
duties.--_n._ CHAM'BERLAINSHIP.--LORD CHAMBERLAIN, an officer of high
standing in the royal household, having control over all the officers and
servants 'above stairs,' except those of the bedchamber, over the
establishment attached to the Chapel Royal, the physicians, surgeons, and
apothecaries of the household; LORD GREAT CHAMBERLAIN, a hereditary officer
who has the government of the palace of Westminster, and upon solemn
occasions the keys of Westminster Hall and of the Court of Requests are
delivered to him. [O. Fr. _chambrelenc_; Old Ger. _chamerling_--L.
_camera_, a chamber, and affix _-ling_ or _-lenc_ = Eng. _-ling_ in
_hireling_.]

CHAMBERTIN, shang'bert-ang, _n._ a famous red Burgundy from the vineyard of
that name near Dijon, in France.

CHAMELEON, ka-m[=e]l'yun, _n._ a small lizard famous for changing its
colour: (_fig._) an inconstant person.--_adjs._ CHAMEL'EONIC,
CHAMEL'EON-LIKE. [L. _chamæleon_--Gr. _chamaile[=o]n_--_chamai_ (= L.
_humi_), on the ground, dwarf, and _le[=o]n_, a lion.]

CHAMELOT, kam'e-lot, _n._ (_Spens._). CAMLET.

CHAMFER, cham'f[.e]r, _n._ a bevel or slope made by paring off the edge of
anything originally right-angled, either in wood or stone work: a groove,
channel, or furrow.--_v.t._ to cut or grind off bevel-wise, as a corner: to
channel or make furrows upon; to flute, as a column.--_adj._ CHAM'FERED,
furrowed, grooved, wrinkled. [Fr. _chanfrein_--O. Fr. _chanfraindre_, which
acc. to Dr Murray may be from _chant fraindre_--L. _cantum frang[)e]re_, to
break the edge or side.]

CHAMFRAIN, cham'fren, _n._ a piece of leather or plate of steel to protect
the face of a horse in battle.--Also CHAM'FRON, CHAF'FRON. [Fr.
_chanfrein_; origin unknown.]

CHAMLET, kam'let, _n._ Same as CAMLET.

CHAMOIS, sha'moi, sham'i, or sham'waw, _n._ a goat-like species or genus of
antelope inhabiting the Alps and other high mountains of southern and
central Europe: a soft kind of leather originally made from its skin.
[Fr.,--Teut.; cf. mod. Ger. _gemse_, a chamois.]

CHAMOMILE. See CAMOMILE.

CHAMP, champ, _v.i._ to make a snapping noise with the jaws in
chewing.--_v.t._ to bite or chew: to crush: to mash.--_n._ champing.--_n._
CHAMP'ING, the action of the verb _champ_: mashing. [Older form _cham_,
most prob. from Scand.]

CHAMPAC, cham'pak, _n._ an Indian tree of great beauty, much venerated by
Brahminists and Buddhists.--Also CHAM'PAK. [Hind.]

CHAMPAGNE, sham-p[=a]n', _n._ a light sparkling wine from _Champagne_ in
France. Still or non-effervescent champagne is also made.

CHAMPAIGN, sham-p[=a]n', _adj._ level, open.--_n._ an open, level
country.--_n._ CHAMP (_her._), the field of a shield.--THE CHAMPAGNE, level
land. [A doublet of CAMPAIGN, from O. Fr. _champaigne_--L. _campania_, a
plain.]

CHAMPERTY, sham'p[.e]r-ti, _n._ an illegal bargain whereby the one party is
to assist the other in recovering property, and is to share in the
proceeds.--_n._ CHAM'PART, the division of the produce of land, the right
of the feudal lord. [Norm. Fr.--L. _campi pars_, part of the field.]

CHAMPIGNON, sham-pin'yon, _n._ a mushroom, esp. the Fairy-ring Agaric.
[Fr.]

CHAMPION, cham'pi-un, _n._ one who fights in single combat for himself or
for another: one who defends a cause: a successful combatant: in boxing,
running, &c., one who has excelled all others: a hero:--_fem._
CHAM'PIONESS.--_adj._ acting as champion, first: first-class.--_v.t._
(_obs._) to challenge: to defend: to support.--_n._ CHAM'PIONSHIP.
[Fr.,--Low L. _campio_, _campion-em_--L. _campus_, a plain, a place for
games.]

CHANCE, chans, _n._ that which falls out or happens: an unexpected event:
risk: opportunity: possibility of something happening: probability: (_pl._)
misfortunes.--_v.t._ to risk.--_v.i._ to happen.--_adj._ happening by
chance.--_adv._ perchance.--_n._ CHANCE'-COM'ER, one who comes by chance or
unexpectedly.--_adjs._ CHANCE'FUL (_Spens._), full of risk or danger,
hazardous; CHANC'Y (_coll._), lucky, bringing good luck: also risky,
uncertain.--BY CHANCE, accidentally; EVEN CHANCE, the probability being
equally for or against.--HOW CHANCE? (_Shak._) how does it happen
that?--STAND A GOOD CHANCE, to have a reasonable expectation; TAKE ONE'S
CHANCE, to accept what happens: to risk an undertaking; THE MAIN CHANCE,
the chief object (often used of matrimony): what is most important. [O. Fr.
_cheance_--Low L. _cadentia_--L. _cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

CHANCEL, chan'sel, _n._ the eastern part of a church, originally separated
from the nave by a screen of lattice-work, so as to prevent general access
thereto, though not to interrupt either sight or sound. [O. Fr.,--L.
_cancelli_, lattices.]

CHANCELLOR, chan'sel-or, _n._ (_Shak._) secretary: the president of a court
of chancery or other court: the official who keeps the registers of an
order of knighthood: the titular head of a university: (_Scot._) the
foreman of a jury.--_ns._ CHAN'CELLORSHIP; CHAN'CELLORY.--CHANCELLOR OF A
CATHEDRAL, an officer who formerly had charge of the chapter library,
custody of the common seal, superintendence of the choir practices, and
headship of the cathedral schools; CHANCELLOR OF A DIOCESE, an
ecclesiastical judge uniting the functions of vicar-general and official
principal, appointed to assist the bishop in questions of ecclesiastical
law, and hold his courts for him; CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER, the chief
minister of finance in the British government; LORD CHANCELLOR, LORD HIGH
CHANCELLOR, the presiding judge of the Court of Chancery, the keeper of the
great seal, and the first lay person of the state after the blood-royal.
[Fr. _chancelier_--Low L. _cancellarius_, orig. an officer that had charge
of records, and stood near the _cancelli_ (L.), the crossbars that
surrounded the judgment-seat.]

CHANCE-MEDLEY, chans'-med-li, _n._ homicide justifiable because done in the
hot blood caused by an unprovoked assault--the word has no reference to
homicide by accident: inadvertency. [O. Fr. _chance medlée_, mingled
chance. 'From the fact that _medley_ is also a noun, and _chance-medley_ a
possible combination in the sense of "fortuitous medley," the meaning has
often been mistaken' (Dr Murray).]

CHANCERY, chan's[.e]r-i, _n._ formerly the highest court of justice next to
the House of Lords, presided over by the Lord High Chancellor--now a
division of the High Court of Justice: a court of record generally:
(_slang_) the position of a boxer's head when under his adversary's arm:
(_obs._) the office of a chancellor or ambassador.--CHANCERY OFFICE, in
Scotland, an office in the General Register House at Edinburgh, managed by
a director, in which all royal charters of novodamus, patents of dignities,
gifts of offices, remissions, legitimations, presentations, commissions,
and other writs appointed to pass the Great and Quarter Seals are
recorded.--IN CHANCERY, in litigation, as an estate: (_slang_) in an
awkward predicament. [Fr. _chancellerie_.]

CHANCRE, shang'k[.e]r, _n._ an ulcer arising from the direct application of
syphilitic poison.--_adjs._ CHAN'CROID, CHAN'CROUS. [Fr.; a form of
CANKER.]

CHANDELIER, shan-de-l[=e]r', _n._ a frame with branches for holding
lights.--_ns._ CHAND'LER, originally a candle maker and dealer: a dealer
generally; CHAND'LERING.--_adv._ CHAND'LERLY.--_ns._ CHAND'LERY, goods sold
by a chandler; SHIP'-CHAND'LER, dealer in general stores for ships.
[Fr.,--Low L. _candelaria_, a candlestick--L. _cand[=e]la_, a candle.]

CHANGE, ch[=a]nj, _v.t._ to alter or make different: to put or give for
another: to make to pass from one state to another: to exchange.--_v.i._ to
suffer change: to change one's clothes.--_n._ the act of changing:
alteration or variation of any kind: (_Shak._) exchange: (_Shak._)
fickleness: a shift: variety: small coin: also used as a short term for the
Exchange.--_ns._ CHANGEABIL'ITY, CHANGE'ABLENESS, fickleness: power of
being changed.--_adj._ CHANGE'ABLE, subject or prone to change: fickle:
inconstant.--_adv._ CHANGE'ABLY.--_adj._ CHANGE'FUL, full of change:
changeable.--_adv._ CHANGE'FULLY.--_ns._ CHANGE'FULNESS; CHANGE'-HOUSE
(_Scot._), a small inn or alehouse.--_adj._ CHANGE'LESS, without change:
constant.--_ns._ CHANGE'LING, a child taken or left by the fairies in place
of another--usually an under-sized, crabbed child: one apt to change;
CHANG'ER, one who changes the form of anything: one employed in changing or
discounting money; CHANG'ING-PIECE (_Shak._), a fickle person.--CHANGE
COLOUR, to blush or turn pale; CHANGE ONE'S MIND, to form a different
opinion; CHANGE ONE'S SELF, to change one's clothes; CHANGE ONE'S TUNE, to
change from joy to sorrow: to change one's manner of speaking.--PUT THE
CHANGE ON, to delude, trick.--RING THE CHANGES, to go through the various
changes in ringing a peal of bells: to go over in every possible order: to
pass counterfeit money: to bemuddle a shopman into giving too much change.
[Fr. _changer_--Late L. _cambi[=a]re_--L. _camb[=i]re_, to barter.]

CHANK, changk, CHANK-SHELL, changk'-shel, _n._ the popular name of the
shell of several species of Turbinella, a genus of Gasteropod molluscs,
natives of the East Indian seas, used as ornaments by Hindu women. [Hind.
_cantch_.]

CHANNEL, chan'el, _n._ the bed of a stream of water: the deeper part of a
strait, bay, or harbour: a strait or narrow sea: a groove or furrow: means
of passing or conveying: (_Scot._) gravel.--_v.t._ to make a channel: to
furrow: to convey.--_p.adj._ CHANN'ELLED.--THE CHANNEL, the English
Channel. [O. Fr. _chanel_, _canel_--L. _canalis_, a canal.]

CHANNEL, chan'el, _n._ a flat piece of wood or iron projecting horizontally
from a ship's side to spread the shrouds and keep them clear of the
bulwarks--_fore_, _main_, and _mizzen channels_. [Corr. of _Chain-wale_.
Cf. GUNNEL.]

CHANSON, shan'son, _n._ a song.--_n._ CHAN'SONETTE. [Fr.]

CHANT, chant, _v.t._ to sing: to celebrate in song: to recite in a singing
manner: to sell horses fraudulently.--_n._ song: melody: a kind of sacred
music, in which prose is sung.--_ns._ CHANT'ER, CHANT'OR, a singer: a
precentor: in a bagpipe, the pipe with finger-holes, on which the melody is
played: one who cries up horses; CHANT'RESS; CHANT'RY, an endowment, or
chapel, for the chanting of masses; CHANT'Y, a sailor's song, usually with
a drawling refrain, sung in concert while raising the anchor, &c. [Fr.
_chanter_--L. _cant[=a]re_, _can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CHANTAGE, shan-täj', chant'[=a]j, _n._ extortion of money by threats of
scandalous revelations. [Fr.]

CHANTERELLE, shan-ter-el', _n._ the highest string of the violin, &c.: a
yellowish edible mushroom. [Fr.]

CHANTICLEER, chant'i-kl[=e]r, _n._ a cock. [From the name of the cock in
the old beast-epic of Reynard the Fox.] [O. Fr. _chanter_, to sing, _cler_,
clear.]

CHAOS, k[=a]'os, _n._ shapeless mass: disorder: the state of matter before
it was reduced to order by the Creator.--_adj._ CHAOT'IC, confused.--_adv._
CHAOT'ICALLY. [Gr.]

CHAP, chap, _v.i._ to crack: to strike, of a clock, &c.: to knock at a
door.--_v.t._ to fissure.--_n._ crack: an open fissure in the skin, caused
by exposure to frost: a knock.--_adj._ CHAP'LESS.--_p.adj._ CHAPPED,
cracked, of a heavy soil in dry weather, or of the skin in frost: cut
short.--_adj._ CHAP'PY. [M. E. _chappen_; cog. with Dut. and Ger.
_kappen_.]

CHAP, chap, _n._ a fellow, originally a customer, from CHAPMAN.--_n._
CHAP'PIE, a familiar diminutive.

CHAP, chap, _n._ generally _pl._ the jaws.--_adj._ CHAP'FALL'EN, a variant
of Chop-fallen (q.v.). [Northern Eng. and Scot. _chafts_--Scand., as Ice.
_kjaptr_, the jaw.]

CHAPARRAL, chap-a-ral', _n._ dense tangled brushwood. [Sp., prob. Basque
_achaparra_.]

CHAP-BOOK. See CHAPMAN.

CHAPE, ch[=a]p, _n._ the plate of metal at the point of a scabbard: the
catch or hook by which the sheath of a weapon was attached to the
belt.--_adj._ CHAPE'LESS. [Fr.,--Low L. _capa_, a cap.]

CHAPEAU, sha-p[=o]', _n._ a hat. [Fr.]

CHAPEL, chap'el, _n._ a place of worship inferior or subordinate to a
regular church, or attached to a palace, garrison, prison, school, college,
&c.: an oratory in a mausoleum, &c., or a cell of a church containing its
own altar: a dissenters' place of worship, as of Nonconformists in England,
Roman Catholics or Episcopalians in Scotland, &c.: a chapel service--hence
'to keep one's chapels'--to make the requisite number of attendances at
such: an association of workmen in a printing-office.--_n._ CHAP'ELRY, the
jurisdiction of a chapel.--CHAPEL CART (see CART).--CHAPEL OF EASE, a
chapel for worshippers far from the parish church; CHAPEL ROYAL, the
oratory of a royal palace; LADY CHAPEL, such a chapel dedicated to the
Virgin; PROPRIETARY CHAPEL, one that is the property of a private person or
persons. [O. Fr. _capele_--Low L. _cappella_, dim. of _cappa_, a cloak or
cope; orig. from the cloak of St Martin.]

CHAPERON, shap'e-r[=o]n, _n._ a kind of hood or cap: one who attends a lady
in public places as a protector.--_v.t._ to attend a lady to public
places.--_n._ CHAP'ERONAGE. [Fr., a large hood--_chape_, a hooded
cloak--Low L. _cappa_. See CAPE.]

CHAPITER, chap'i-t[.e]r, _n._ the head or capital of a column. [Fr.
_chapitel_--Low L. _capitellum_, dim. of L. _caput_, the head.]

CHAPLAIN, chap'l[=a]n, or chap'lin, _n._ a clergyman attached to a ship of
war, a regiment, a public institution, or private family.--_ns._
CHAP'LAINCY, CHAP'LAINRY, CHAP'LAINSHIP. [O. Fr. _chapelain_--Low L.
_capellanus_--_capella_. See CHAPEL.]

CHAPLET, chap'let, _n._ a garland or wreath for the head: a circlet of
gold, &c.: a string of beads used in counting prayers, one-third of a
rosary in length: anything in a string: a metal support of a cylindrical
pipe.--_adj._ CHAP'LETED. [O. Fr. _chapelet_--_chape_, a head-dress.]

CHAPMAN, chap'man, _n._ one who buys or sells: an itinerant dealer, a
pedlar: (_obs._) a purchaser.--_n._ CHAP'-BOOK, a name given to the books
which were formerly sold by chapmen. [A.S. _céap-man_--_céap_, trade, and
_mann_, man; cf. Ger. _kaufmann_, and see CHEAP.]

CHAPTER, chap't[.e]r, _n._ a main division of a book, or of anything: a
subject or category generally: an assembly of the canons of a cathedral or
collegiate church, or the members of a religious or military order: an
organised branch of some society or fraternity.--_v.t._ to put into
chapters: to take to task.--_n._ CHAP'TER-HOUSE.--CHAPTER-AND-VERSE, the
exact reference to the passage of the authority for one's statements.--THE
CHAPTER OF ACCIDENTS, the catalogue of unforeseen events.--TO THE END OF
THE CHAPTER, throughout the whole subject. [O. Fr. _chapitre_--L.
_capitulum_, dim. of _caput_, the head. From the practice of reading to the
assembled canons or monks a _capitulum_ or chapter of their rule, or of the
Scriptures, the men themselves came to be called in a body the _capitulum_
or chapter, and their meeting-place the chapter-house.]

CHAPTREL, chap'trel, _n._ the capital of a pillar which supports an arch.
[Dim. of CHAPITER.]

CHAR, chär, _n._ a small fish of the salmon kind, found in mountain lakes
and rivers. [Prob. Celt.; cf. Gael, _ceara_, red, blood-coloured.]

CHAR, chär, _v.t._ to roast or burn until reduced to carbon or coal, to
scorch:--_pr.p._ char'ring; _pa.p._ charred.--_adj._ CHAR'RY, pertaining to
charcoal. [Prob. formed from _char_-coal.]

CHAR. See CHARE.

CHAR-À-BANC, shar'-a-bang, _n._ a long light vehicle with transverse seats.
[Fr.]

CHARACTER, kar'ak-t[.e]r, _n._ a letter, sign, figure, stamp, or
distinctive mark: a mark of any kind, a symbol in writing, &c.: writing
generally, handwriting: a secret cipher: any essential feature or
peculiarity: nature: (_obs._) personal appearance: the aggregate of
peculiar qualities which constitutes personal or national individuality:
moral qualities especially, the reputation of possessing such: a formal
statement of the qualities of a person who has been in one's service or
employment: official position, rank, or status, or a person who has filled
such: a person noted for eccentricity: a personality as created in a play
or novel (_Shak._ CHAR'ACT).--_v.t._ to engrave, imprint, write: to
represent, delineate, or describe.--_n._ CHARACTERIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._
CHAR'ACTERISE, to describe by peculiar qualities: to distinguish or
designate.--_ns._ CHAR'ACTERISM; CHARACTERIS'TIC, that which marks or
constitutes the character.--_adjs._ CHARACTERIS'TIC, -AL, marking or
constituting the peculiar nature.--_adv._ CHARACTERIS'TICALLY.--_adj._
CHAR'ACTERLESS, without character or distinctive qualities.--_ns._
CHAR'ACTERLESSNESS; CHAR'ACTERY, writing: impression: that which is
charactered.--IN CHARACTER, in harmony with the part assumed, appropriate,
as a CHARACTER ACTOR, one who tries to represent eccentricities. [Fr.
_caractère_--L. _character_--Gr. _charakt[=e]r_, from _charass-ein_, to
cut, engrave.]

CHARADE, shar-äd', _n._ a species of riddle, the subject of which is a word
proposed for solution from an enigmatical description of its component
syllables and of the whole--the charade is often acted. [Fr.; ety. dub.
Littré gives Prov. _charrada_, chatter; Prof. Skeat quotes Sp. _charrada_,
the speech of a clown.]

CHARCOAL, chär'k[=o]l, _n._ charred wood or coal made by charring wood; the
carbonaceous residue of vegetable, animal, or mineral substances when they
have undergone smothered combustion. [The first element of the word is of
doubtful origin.]

CHARE, ch[=a]r, CHAR, chär, _n._ an occasional piece of work, an odd job:
(_pl._) household work--in America usually CHORE.--_v.i._ to do odd jobs of
work: to do house-cleaning.--_n._ CHAR'WOMAN, a woman hired by the day to
do odd jobs of domestic work. [A.S. _cerran_, _cierran_, to turn.]

CHARET, chär'et, _n._ (_Spens._) same as CHARIOT.

CHARGE, chärj, _v.t._ to load, to put into, to fill (_with_): to load
heavily, burden: to fill completely: to cause to receive electricity: to
lay a task upon one, to enjoin, command: to deliver officially an
injunction, as a judge to a jury, a bishop or archdeacon to his clergy, or
a senior to a junior minister at a Presbyterian ordination: to bring an
accusation against: to exact a sum of money from, to ask as the
price.--_v.i._ to make an onset.--_n._ that which is laid on: cost or
price: the load of powder, &c., for a gun: attack or onset: care, custody:
the object of care, esp. a minister of religion's flock or parish: an
accumulation of electricity in a Leyden jar: command: exhortation:
accusation: (_pl._) expenses.--_adj._ CHARGE'ABLE, liable to be charged,
imputable: blamable: (_B._) burdensome.--_n._ CHARGE'ABLENESS.--_adv._
CHARGE'ABLY.--_adj._ CHARGE'FUL (_Shak._), expensive.--_n._ CHARGE'-HOUSE
(_Shak._), a common school where a fee was charged, in distinction to a
free-school.--_adj._ CHARGE'LESS.--_n._ CHARG'ER, a flat dish capable of
holding a large joint, a platter: a war-horse.--GIVE IN CHARGE, to hand
over to the police. [Fr. _charger_--Low L. _carric[=a]re_, to load--L.
_carrus_, a wagon. See CAR, CARGO.]

CHARGÉ-D'AFFAIRES, shar'zh[=a]-da-f[=a]r', _n._ a fourth-class diplomatic
agent, accredited, not to the sovereign, but to the department for foreign
affairs--he also holds his credentials only from the minister: the person
in charge for the time. [Fr.]

CHARILY, CHARINESS. See CHARY.

CHARIOT, char'i-ot, _n._ a four-wheeled pleasure or state carriage: a car
used in ancient warfare: a light four-wheeled carriage with
back-seats.--_v.t._ to carry in a chariot.--_v.i._ to ride in a
chariot.--_n._ CHARIOTEER', one who drives a chariot.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ to
drive or to ride in such. [Fr., dim. of _char_, a CAR.]

CHARISM, kar'izm, _n._ a free gift of grace.--_adj._ CHARISMAT'IC. [Gr.
_charisma_--_charis_, grace.]

CHARITY, char'i-ti, _n._ (_N.T._) universal love: the disposition to think
favourably of others, and do them good: almsgiving: (_pl._)
affections.--_adj._ CHAR'ITABLE, of or relating to charity: liberal to the
poor.--_n._ CHAR'ITABLENESS.--_adv._ CHAR'ITABLY.--COLD AS CHARITY, an
ironical phrase implying the coldness of much so-called charity, which
should naturally be warm. [Fr. _charité_--L. _caritat-em_, _carus_, dear.]

CHARIVARI, shär'i-vär'i, _n._ a French term used to designate a wild tumult
and uproar, produced by the beating of pans, kettles, and dishes, mingled
with whistling, bawling, groans, and hisses, expressive of displeasure
against an individual--the 'rough music' not unknown in England as a
popular protest against an unequal marriage, or the like. [Ety. dub.; the
word, as suggesting derision, has been adopted as a name by satirical
journals.]

CHARK, chärk, _v.t._ to burn to charcoal.--_n._ charcoal, coke.

CHARLATAN, shär'la-tan, _n._ a mere talking pretender: a quack.--_adj._
CHARLATAN'IC.--_ns._ CHAR'LATANISM, CHAR'LATANRY. [Fr.,--It.
_ciarlatano_--_ciarlare_, to chatter, an imit. word.]

CHARLES'S WAIN, _n._ a name given to the seven bright stars in Ursa Major,
the Plough. [A.S. _Carles wægn_, Carl being Charlemagne.]

CHARLEY, CHARLIE, chär'li, _n._ a night-watchman: the small triangular
beard familiar in the portraits of _Charles_ I.: the fox.--_n._
CHAR'LEY-PITCH'ER (_slang_), one who makes a living by the thimble-and-pea
trick.

CHARLOCK, chär'lok, _n._ a plant of the mustard family, with yellow
flowers, that grows as a weed in cornfields. [A.S. _cerlic_.]

CHARLOTTE, shär'lot, _n._ a dish of apple marmalade covered with crumbs of
toast.--CHARLOTTE RUSSE, a custard enclosed in a kind of sponge-cake.

CHARM, chärm, _n._ a spell: something thought to possess occult power, a
metrical form of words: attractiveness: a trinket worn on a watch-guard:
the blended singing of birds, children, &c.: (_pl._) female beauty or other
personal attractions: that which can please irresistibly.--_v.t._ to
influence by a charm: to subdue by secret influence: to enchant: to
delight, to allure.--_adj._ CHARMED, protected, as by a special
charm.--_n._ CHARM'ER.--_adj._ CHARM'FUL, abounding with charms.--_p.adj._
CHARM'ING, highly pleasing: delightful: fascinating.--_adv._
CHARM'INGLY.--_adj._ CHARM'LESS, wanting or destitute of charms. [Fr.
_charme_--L. _carmen_, a song.]

CHARNECO, chär'ne-ko, _n._ (_Shak._) a kind of sweet wine. [Prob. from the
name of a village near Lisbon.]

CHARNEL, chär'nel, _adj._ of, or pertaining to, a charnel or burial-place,
as in 'charnel-vault,' &c.: sepulchral, death-like.--_n._ CHAR'NEL-HOUSE, a
place where the bones of the dead are deposited. [O. Fr. _charnel_--Low L.
_carn[=a]le_--L. _carnalis_, _caro_, _carnis_, flesh.]

CHARON, k[=a]'ron, _n._ in Greek mythology, the ferryman who rowed the
shades of the dead across the river Styx in the lower world: a ferryman
generally. [Gr.]

CHARPIE, shär'p[=e], _n._ lint shredded down so as to form a soft material
for dressing wounds. [O. Fr. _charpir_--L. _carp[)e]re_, to pluck.]

CHARPOY, char'poi, _n._ the common Indian bedstead, sometimes handsomely
wrought and painted. [Hind. _cha[=a]rp[=a][=i]_--Pers.
_chih[=a]r-p[=a][=i]_, four feet.]

CHARQUI, chär'k[=e], _n._ beef cut into long strips and dried in the
sun--jerked beef. [Peruv.]

CHARR. Same as CHAR (1).

CHART, chärt, _n._ a marine or hydrographical map, exhibiting a portion of
a sea or other water, with the islands, coasts of contiguous land,
soundings, currents, &c: an outline-map, or a tabular statement giving
information of any kind.--_adjs._ CHART[=A]'CEOUS; CHART'LESS. [O. Fr.
_charte_--L. _charta_, a paper.]

CHARTER, chärt'er, _n._ any formal writing in evidence of a grant,
contract, or other transaction, conferring or confirming titles, rights, or
privileges, or the like: the formal deed by which a sovereign guarantees
the rights and privileges of his subjects, like the famous MAG'NA CHART'A,
signed by King John at Runnymede, 15th June 1215, or the CHARTE of Louis
XVIII. at the Restoration in 1814, or that sworn by Louis-Philippe, 29th
August 1830: any instrument by which powers and privileges are conferred by
the state on a select body of persons for a special object, as the 'charter
of a bank:' a patent: grant, allowance: immunity.--_v.t._ to establish by
charter: to let or hire, as a ship, on contract.--_p.adj._ CHART'ERED,
granted or protected by a charter: privileged: licensed: hired by contract.
[O. Fr. _chartre_--L. _cartula_, _carta_.]

CHARTERHOUSE, chärt'[.e]r-hows, _n._ a Carthusian monastery: the famous
hospital and school instituted in London in 1611, on the site of a
Carthusian monastery--now transferred--the 'masterpiece of Protestant
English charity' in Fuller's phrase.--_ns._ CHAR'TREUSE, a Carthusian
monastery, esp. the original one, the Grande Chartreuse near Grenoble in
France: a famous liqueur, green, yellow, or white, long manufactured here
by the monks from aromatic herbs and brandy: a kind of enamelled pottery: a
pale greenish colour; CHAR'TREUX, a Carthusian: the Charterhouse School.

CHARTER-PARTY, chärt'[.e]r-pär'ti, _n._ the common written form in which
the contract of affreightment is expressed--viz. the hiring of the whole or
part of a ship for the conveyance of goods. [Fr. _charte-partie_, lit. a
divided charter, as the practice was to divide it in two and give a half to
each person. L. _charta part[=i]ta_.]

CHARTISM, chärt'izm, _n._ a movement in Great Britain for the extension of
political power to the working-classes, rising out of widespread national
distress and popular disappointment with the results of the Reform Bill of
1832--its programme, the 'People's Charter,' drawn up in 1838, with six
_points_: (1) Manhood Suffrage; (2) Equal Electoral Districts; (3) Vote by
Ballot; (4) Annual Parliaments; (5) Abolition of Property Qualification;
and (6) Payment of Members of the House of Commons.--_n._ CHART'IST, a
supporter of chartism.

CHARTOGRAPHY. See CARTOGRAPHY.

CHARTREUSE, CHARTREUX. See CHARTERHOUSE.

CHARTULARY. Same as CARTULARY.

CHARWOMAN. See CHARE.

CHARY, ch[=a]r'i, _adj._ sparing: cautious.--_adv._ CHAR'ILY.--_n._
CHAR'INESS. [A.S. _cearig_--_cearu_, care.]

CHARYBDIS, kar-ib'dis, _n._ a dangerous whirlpool between Italy and Sicily,
and opposite to Scylla, the two together providing a proverbial alternative
of ruin hardly to be escaped.

CHASE, ch[=a]s, _v.t._ to pursue: to hunt: to drive away, put to
flight.--_n._ pursuit: a hunting: that which is hunted: ground abounding in
game.--_n._ CHASE'PORT, the porthole at the bow or stern of a vessel,
through which the chase-gun is fired.--BEASTS OF CHASE, properly the buck,
doe, fox, marten, and roe: wild beasts that are hunted
generally.--WILD-GOOSE CHASE, any foolish or profitless pursuit. [O. Fr.
_chacier_, _chasser_--L. _capt[=a]re_, freq. of _cap[)e]re_, to take.]

CHASE, ch[=a]s, _v.t._ to decorate metal-work, whether hammered or punched
up, by engraving the exterior.--_ns._ CHAS'ER, one who practises chasing;
CHAS'ING, the art of representing figures in bas-relief by punching them
out from behind, and then carving them on the front: the art of cutting the
threads of screws. [Short for ENCHASE.]

CHASE, ch[=a]s, _n._ a case or frame for holding types: a groove. [Fr.
_châsse_, a shrine, a setting--L. _capsa_, a chest. See CASE.]

CHASERICULTURE, chas-er-i-kul't[=u]r, _n._ the combined industries of
tea-growing and of silk-production. [A combination of Chinese _cha_, tea,
_chasze_, the former tea valuers of Canton, and L. _sericum_, silk.]

CHASM, kazm, _n._ a yawning or gaping hollow: a gap or opening: a void
space.--_adjs._ CHASMED; CHASM'Y. [Gr. _chasma_, from _chain-ein_, to gape;
cf. CHAOS.]

CHASSE, shäs, _n._ a dram or liqueur taken after coffee, to remove the
taste.--Also CHASSE-CAFÉ [Fr. _chasse-café_--_chasser_, to chase, remove.]

CHASSÉ, shäs'[=a], _n._ a kind of gliding step in dancing.--_v.t._ to make
such a step: (_slang_) to dismiss. [Fr.]

CHASSEPOT, shas'po, _n._ the kind of bolt-action breechloading rifle
adopted by the French army in 1866. [From Antoine Alphonse _Chassepot_, the
inventor.]

CHASSEUR, sha-s[=a]r', _n._ a hunter or huntsman: one of a select body of
French light troops, either infantry or cavalry; a domestic dressed in
military garb in the houses of the great. [Fr. _chasser_, to hunt.]

CHASTE, ch[=a]st, _adj._ modest; refined; virtuous: pure in taste and
style.--_adv._ CHASTE'LY.--_ns._ CHASTE'NESS, the quality of being chaste;
CHAS'TITY, sexual purity: virginity: refinement of language: moderation.
[O. Fr. _chaste_--L. _castus_, pure.]

CHASTEN, ch[=a]s'n, _v.t._ to free from faults by punishing--hence to
punish, to purify or refine: to restrain or moderate.--_p.adj._ CHAS'TENED,
purified: modest.--_n._ CHAS'TENMENT.

CHASTISE, chas-t[=i]z', _v.t._ to inflict punishment upon for the purpose
of correction: to reduce to order or to obedience.--_adj._
CHAST[=I]S'ABLE.--_n._ CHAS'TISEMENT.

[Illustration]

CHASUBLE, chaz'[=u]-bl, _n._ a sleeveless vestment worn over the alb by the
priest while celebrating mass. [O. Fr. _chesible_--Low L. _casubula_--L.
_casula_, a mantle, dim. of _casa_, a hut.]

CHAT, chat, _v.i._ to talk idly or familiarly:--_pr.p._ chat'ting; _pa.p._
chat'ted.--_n._ familiar, idle talk.--_n._ CHAT'TINESS.--_adj._ CHAT'TY,
given to chat, talkative. [Short for CHATTER.]

CHAT, chat, _n._ a genus of small birds in the thrush family, of which the
wheatear is a familiar example. [From the sound of their voice.]

CHATEAU, sha-t[=o]', _n._ a castle, a great country-seat, esp. in France
(common in place-names, and connected with wines, as 'Château Lafitte,'
'Château Yqem,' &c.).--_ns._ CHATELAIN (shat'e-l[=a]n), a castellan;
CHAT'ELAINE, a female castellan: an ornamental appendage, suitable to a
lady chatelaine, consisting of short chains bearing keys, corkscrew,
scissors, &c., attached to the waist-belt: a similar thing in miniature
attached to the watch-chain.--CHÂTEAU EN ESPAGNE, a castle in the air. [O.
Fr. _chastel_ (Fr. _château_)--L. _castellum_, dim. of _castrum_, a fort.]

CHATON, sha-tong', _n._ the head of a ring. [Fr.]

CHATOYANT, shat-oi'ant, _adj._ with a changing lustre, like a cat's eye in
the dark. [Fr.]

CHATTA, chät'a, _n._ an umbrella. [Hind.]

CHATTEL, chat'l, _n._ any kind of property which is not freehold,
distinguished further into _chattels-real_ and _chattels-personal_, the
latter being mere personal movables--money, plate, cattle, and the like;
the former including leasehold interests.--GOODS AND CHATTELS, all
corporeal movables. [O. Fr. _chatel_--Low L. _captale_--L. _capitale_, &c.,
property, goods.]

CHATTER, chat'er, _v.i._ to talk idly or rapidly: to sound as the teeth
when one shivers.--_ns._ CHATT'ERBOX, one who chatters or talks
incessantly; CHATT'ERER, one that chatters: an idle talker: a significant
popular name applied to the birds of a small family of finch-like perching
birds, as the Bohemian wax-wing and the cedar bird of America; CHATT'ERING,
noise like that made by a magpie, or by the striking together of the teeth:
idle talk. [From the sound.]

CHATTY, chat'i, _n._ an earthen water-pot in India. [Hind.]

CHAUCERIAN, chä-s[=e]'ri-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Chaucer_, or like
him.--_n._ a devoted student of Chaucer.--_n._ CHAU'CERISM, anything
characteristic of Chaucer.

CHAUD-MELLÉ, sh[=o]d-m[=a]'l[=a], _n._ a fight arising in the heat of
passion: the killing of a man in such a fight.--Also CHAUD'-MED'LEY. [O.
Fr. _chaude-mellee_, hot fight. See MÊLÉE.]

CHAUFE, CHAUFF (_Spens._). Forms of CHAFE.

CHAUFFER, chaw'f[.e]r, _n._ a metal box for holding fire, a portable
furnace or stove. [See CHAFER.]

CHAUFFEUR, sh[=o]f-f[.e]r, _n._ a motor-car attendant. [Fr.]

CHAUSSES, sh[=o]s, or sh[=o]'sez, _n.pl._ any closely fitting covering for
the legs, hose generally: the defence-pieces for the legs in ancient
armour.--_n._ CHAUSSURE', a general name for boots and shoes. [O. Fr.
_chauces_--L. _calcias_, pl. of _calcia_, hose.]

CHAUTAUQUAN, sha-taw'kwan, _adj._ pertaining to a system of instruction for
adults by home reading and study under guidance, evolved from the
_Chautauqua_ Literary and Scientific Circle, organised in 1878.

CHAUVINISM, sh[=o]'vin-izm, _n._ an absurdly extravagant pride in one's
country, with a corresponding contempt for foreign nations--the French
equivalent of the Jingoism of London music-halls.--_ns._ CHAU'VIN,
CHAU'VINIST.--_adj._ CHAUVINIST'IC. [Fr. _chauvinisme_, from _Chauvin_, a
figure in _La Cocarde tricolore_.]

CHAVENDER, chav'en-der, _n._ the chub or cheven.

CHAW, chaw, _n._ (_Spens._) the jaw--usually _pl._--_v.t._ to chew, still
used of tobacco.--_n._ CHAW'-B[=A]'CON, a country clown, a rustic
fellow.--CHAWED UP, destroyed. [See JAW.]

CHAWDRON, chaw'dron, _n._ (_Shak._) part of the entrails of an animal. [O.
Fr. _chaudun_.]

CHAY, a vulgar form of CHAISE.

CHAYA-ROOT. Same as SHAYA-ROOT.

CHEAP, ch[=e]p, _adj._ low in price: of a place where prices are low, as 'a
cheap market:' of a low price in relation to the value: easily obtained: of
small value, or reckoned at such.--_v.t._ CHEAP'EN, to ask the price of a
thing: to make cheap, to lower the price of: to lower the reputation of: to
beat down the price of.--_n._ CHEAP'ENER.--_adv._ CHEAP'LY.--_n._
CHEAP'NESS.--CHEAP JACK, or JOHN, a travelling hawker who pretends to give
great bargains; CHEAP LABOUR, labour paid at a poor rate; CHEAP TRIP, an
excursion by rail or steamer at a reduced fare; CHEAP-TRIPPER, one who goes
on such a trip.--DIRT CHEAP, ridiculously cheap.--ON THE CHEAP, cheap or
cheaply.--TO BE CHEAP OF ANYTHING (_Scot._), to get off with less than one
deserved or expected, as of punishment. [Orig. _good cheap_, i.e. a good
bargain; A.S. _ceap_, price, a bargain; A.S. _céapian_, Ice. _kaupa_, Ger.
_kaufen_, to buy; Scot. _coup_--all borrowed from L. _caupo_, a huckster.]

CHEAT, ch[=e]t, _v.t._ to deceive, defraud, impose upon.--_v.i._ to
practise deceit.--_n._ a fraud: one who cheats.--_ns._ CHEAT'ER, one who
cheats: (_Shak._) an officer who collected the fines to be paid into the
Exchequer; CHEAT'ERY (_coll._), cheating.--PUT A CHEAT UPON, to
deceive.--TAME CHEATER, a decoy. [M. E. _cheten_, a form of _escheten_, to
escheat.]

CHECK, chek, _v.t._ to bring to a stand: to restrain or hinder: to rebuke:
to control an account, &c., by comparison with certified data, vouchers,
&c.: to place in check at chess: to mark with a pattern of crossing
lines.--_n._ a term in chess when one party obliges the other either to
move or guard his king: anything that checks: a sudden stop, repulse, or
rebuff: (_B._, _Shak._) a rebuke: a mark put against items in a list: an
order for money (usually written CHEQUE): any counter-register used as
security, a counterfoil: a token, of printed paper or metal, given to a
railroad passenger to make secure the after-identification of his luggage,
to a person leaving his seat in a theatre with the intention of returning,
&c.: (_U.S._) a counter used in games at cards--hence 'to pass in one's
checks' = to die: a pattern of cross lines forming small squares, as in a
chessboard: any fabric woven with such a pattern.--_adj._ (_her._) divided
into small squares by transverse, perpendicular, and horizontal
lines.--_ns._ CHECK'-CLERK, a clerk who checks accounts, &c.; CHECK'ER, one
who hinders or rebukes; CHECK'ER-BOARD, a board on which checkers or
draughts is played; CHECK'-KEY, a latch-key; CHECK'MATE, in chess, a check
given to the adversary's king when in a position in which it can neither be
protected nor moved out of check, so that the game is finished: a complete
check: defeat: overthrow.--_v.t._ in chess, to make a movement which ends
the game: to defeat.--_ns._ CHECK'-REIN, a coupling rein, a strap hindering
the horse from lowering its head; CHECK'-STRING, a string by which the
occupant of a carriage may attract the driver's notice; CHECK'-TAK'ER, the
collector of admission tickets at a theatre, railway-train, &c.;
CHECK'-WEIGH'ER, one who on the part of the men checks the weight of coal
sent up to the pit-mouth. [O. Fr. _eschec_, _eschac_ (Low L. _scaccus_,
_sc[=a]chus_, It. _scacco_, Sp. _jaque_, Ger. _scach_), through Ar. from
Pers. _sh[=a]h_, king--CHECKMATE being O. Fr. _eschec mat_--Ar. _sh[=a]h
m[=a]t(a)_, 'the king is dead,' i.e. can make no further move.]

CHECKER. See CHEQUER.

CHECKER-BERRY, chek'[.e]r-beri, _n._ an American name for the winter-green
(q.v.).

CHECKERS, chek'[.e]rz, _n.pl._ the game of draughts.

CHECKLATON, chek'la-ton, _n._ (_Spens._) a cloth of gold or other rich
material.--Also CIC'LATOUN. [O. Fr. _ciclaton_, from Ar., prob. from the
same root as _scarlet_.]

CHEDDAR, ched'ar, _n._ an excellent kind of cheese first made in
Somersetshire. [From the village of _Cheddar_ in Somersetshire.]

CHEEK, ch[=e]k, _n._ the side of the face below the eye, the fleshy lateral
wall of the mouth: effrontery, impudence, as in 'to have the cheek' to do
anything, 'to give cheek:' one of the side-posts of a door or window: the
cheek-strap of a horse's bridle, the ring at the end of the bit: anything
arranged in internal pairs.--_v.t._ to address insolently.--_ns._
CHEEK'BONE, the bone of the cheek; CHEEK'-POUCH, a dilatation of the skin
of the cheek, forming a bag outside the teeth, as in monkeys, &c.;
CHEEK'-TOOTH, a molar tooth.--_adj._ CHEEK'Y, insolent, saucy.--CHEEK BY
JOWL, side by side.--TO ONE'S OWN CHEEK, for one's own private use. [A.S.
_céce_, _céace_, the cheek, jaw; cf. Dut. _kaak_.]

CHEEP, ch[=e]p, _v.i._ to chirp, as a young bird.--_n._ any similar sound.
[From the sound, like CHIRP.]

CHEER, ch[=e]r, _n._ disposition, frame of mind (with _good_, &c.): joy: a
shout of approval or welcome: kind treatment: entertainment: fare,
food.--_v.t._ to comfort: to encourage: to applaud: to inspirit--'to cheer
up.'--_v.i._ in such phrases as 'How cheer'st thou?'--_refl._ as in 'Cheer
thee.'--_n._ CHEER'ER, one who, or that which, cheers.--_adj._ CHEER'FUL,
of good spirits: joyful: lively.--_advs._ CHEER'FULLY, CHEER'ILY.--_ns._
CHEER'FULNESS; CHEER'INESS; CHEER'ISHNESS (_Milton_), cheerfulness.--_adj._
CHEER'LESS, without comfort: gloomy.--_n._ CHEER'LESSNESS.--_adj._
CHEER'LY, cheerful.--_adv._ in a cheery manner: heartily.--_adj._ CHEER'Y,
cheerful: promoting cheerfulness. [O. Fr. _chiere_, the countenance--Low L.
_cara_, the face.]

CHEESE, ch[=e]z, _n._ a wholesome article of food, made into a round form,
from the curd of milk coagulated by rennet, separated from the whey, and
pressed into a hard mass.--_ns._ CHEESE'-CAKE, a cake made of soft curds,
sugar, and butter, or whipped egg and sugar; CHEESE'-HOP'PER, the larva of
a small fly, remarkable for its leaping power, found in cheese;
CHEESE'-MITE, a very small insect which breeds in cheese; CHEESE'-MONG'ER,
a dealer in cheese; CHEESE'-PAR'ING (_Shak._), paring, or rind, of
cheese.--_adj._ mean and parsimonious.--_ns._ CHEESE'-PRESS, a machine in
which curds for cheese are pressed; CHEESE'-RENN'ET, the plant Ladies'
bed-straw, so called because used as rennet in curdling milk; CHEESE'-VAT,
a vat or wooden case in which curds are pressed; CHEES'INESS.--_adj._
CHEES'Y, having the nature of cheese.--CHEESE IT (_slang_), stop, have
done, run off.--GREEN CHEESE, cheese not yet dried.--TO MAKE CHEESES, to
whirl round and then sink down suddenly so as to make the petticoats stand
out like a cheese. [A.S. _cése_, _cýse_, curdled milk (Ger. _käse_)--L.
_caseus_.]

CHEESE, ch[=e]z, _n._ (_slang_) the correct thing, of excellent quality,
[Colonel Yule explains it as Pers. and Hind. _ch[=i]z_, thing, the
expression having formerly been common among young Anglo-Indians, e.g.
'These cheroots are the real _ch[=i]z_,' i.e. the real thing.]

CHEETAH, ch[=e]'tah, _n._ an Eastern animal like the leopard, used in
hunting. [Hind, _ch[=i]t[=a]_--Sans. _chitraka_, _chitrak[=a]ya_, having a
speckled body.]

CHEF, shef, _n._ a master-cook; a reliquary in the shape of a head.--_adj._
chief, as in CHEF D'OEUVRE, masterpiece, [Fr. See CHIEF.]

CHEIROMANCY, k[=i]'ro-man-si, _n._ the art of telling fortunes by the
lineaments of the hand--also CHEIROS'OPHY.--_adj._ CHEIROSOPH'ICAL.--_n._
CHEIROS'OPHIST, [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, _manteia_, prophecy.]

CHEIROPTERA, k[=i]-rop't[.e]r-a, _n.pl._ the order of Bats.--_adj._
CHEIROP'TEROUS. [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, _pteron_, a wing.]

CHEIROTHERIUM, k[=i]-ro-th[=e]r'i-um, _n._ the name originally given to the
Labyrinthodont, from its peculiar hand-like impressions in the Triassic
rocks.--_adj._ CHEIROTH[=E]'RIAN. [Gr. _cheir_, hand, _th[=e]rion_, beast.]

CHELA, k[=e]'la, _n._ the prehensile claw of a crab or scorpion.--_adj._
CH[=E]'LATE.--_n._ CH[=E]'LIFER, the book-scorpion.--_adjs._ CHELIF'EROUS;
CH[=E]'LIFORM. [L.,--Gr. _ch[=e]l[=e]_.]

CHELA, ch[=e]'la, _n._ a novice in esoteric Buddhism.--_n._ CH[=E]'LASHIP.
[Hind. _ch[=e]l[=a]_, servant.]

CHELICERA, k[=e]l-is'er-a, _n._ a technical term, usually restricted to the
biting organs which form the first pair of appendages in spiders,
scorpions, and other Arachnida:--_pl._ CHELIC'ERÆ (-r[=e]). [Gr.
_ch[=e]l[=e]_, a crab's claw, _keras_, horn.]

CHELONIA, ke-l[=o]'ni-a, _n._ an order of vertebrate animals including the
tortoise and turtle.--_adj._ and _n._ CHEL[=O]'NIAN. [Gr. _chel[=o]n[=e]_,
a tortoise.]

CHEMISE, she-m[=e]z', _n._ a woman's shirt or sark, a smock or shift.--_n._
CHEMISETTE', a kind of bodice worn by women, the lace or muslin which fills
up the open front of a woman's dress. [Fr. _chemise_--Low L. _camisia_, a
nightgown, surplice.]

CHEMISTRY, kem'is-tri, formerly CHYM'ISTRY, _n._ the science which treats
of the properties of substances both elementary and compound, and of the
laws of their combination and action one upon another.--_adjs._ CHEM'IC,
-AL (CHEM'ICO-, in many compound words), CHEMIAT'RIC (a Paracelsian term,
Gr. _ch[=e]meia_, chemistry, _iatreia_, medical treatment).--_adv._
CHEM'ICALLY.--_n.pl._ CHEM'ICALS, substances which form the subject of
chemical effects.--_ns._ CHEM'ISM, chemical action; CHEM'IST, one skilled
in chemistry, specially a druggist or apothecary.--CHEMICAL AFFINITY, the
name given to the tendency to combine with one another which is exhibited
by many substances, or to the force by which the substances constituting a
compound are held together; CHEMICAL NOTATION, a method of expressing the
composition of chemical substances and representing chemical changes, by
certain known symbols and formulæ; CHEMICAL WORKS, manufactories where
chemical processes are carried on for trade, as _alkali works_, &c. [From
ALCHEMY (q.v.).]

CHEMITYPE, kemi'-t[=i]p, _n._ the chemical process for obtaining casts in
relief from an engraving.--_n._ CHEM'ITYPY.

CHEMOSH, k[=e]'mosh, _n._ the national god of Moab: any false god.

CHENILLE, she-n[=e]l', _n._ a thick, velvety-looking cord of silk or wool
(and so resembling a caterpillar), used in ornamental sewing and
manufactured trimmings. [Fr. _chenille_, a caterpillar--L. _canicula_, a
hairy little dog, _canis_, a dog.]

CHEQUE, CHECK, chek, _n._ a money order on a banker payable at
demand.--_ns._ CHEQUE'-BOOK, a book containing cheque forms given by a bank
to its customers; CHEQ'UER, CHECK'ER, a chess-board: alternation of
colours, as on a chess-board: (_pl._) draughts: chess-men.--_v.t._ to mark
in squares of different colours: to variegate: interrupt.--_adjs._
CHEQ'UERED, CHECK'ERED, variegated, like a chess-board: varying in
character.--_ns._ CHEQ'UER-WORK, any pattern having alternating squares of
different colours; BLANK'-CHEQUE, a cheque signed by the owner, but without
having the amount to be drawn indicated; CROSS'-CHEQUE, an ordinary cheque
with two transverse lines drawn across it, which have the effect of making
it payable only through a banker. [See CHECK.]

CHERIMOYER, cher-i-moi'er, _n._ a Peruvian fruit resembling the
custard-apple.--Also CHIRIMOY'A.

CHERISH, cher'ish, _v.t._ to protect and treat with affection: to nurture,
nurse: to entertain in the mind.--_n._ CHER'ISHMENT. [Fr. _chérir_,
_chérissant_--_cher_, dear--L. _carus_.]

CHEROOT, she-r[=oo]t', _n._ a cigar not pointed at either end. [Fr.
_cheroute_, representing the Tamil name _shuruttu_, a roll (Colonel Yule).]

CHEROOT. See SHAYA-ROOT.

CHERRY, cher'i, _n._ a small bright-red stone-fruit: the tree that bears
it.--_adj._ like a cherry in colour: ruddy.--_ns._ CHERR'Y-BRAND'Y, a
pleasant liqueur made by steeping Morello cherries in brandy;
CHERR'Y-LAU'REL, the common English name for the _Cerasus Lauro-Cerasus_ of
Asia Minor; CHERR'Y-PEPP'ER, a West Indian species of _Capsicum_;
CHERR'Y-PIE, a pie made of cherries; the common heliotrope; CHERR'Y-PIT, a
game which consists in throwing cherry-stones into a small hole;
CHERR'Y-STONE, the hard seed of the cherry. [A.S. _ciris_--L.
_cerasus_--Gr. _kerasos_, a cherry-tree, said to be so named from
_Cerasus_, a town in Pontus, from which the cherry was brought.]

CHERRY, cher'i, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to cheer.

CHERSONESE, ker'so-n[=e]z, _n._ a peninsula, [Gr.
_cher-son[=e]sos_--_chersos_, land, dry land, _n[=e]sos_, an island.]

CHERT, ch[.e]rt, _n._ a kind of quartz or flint: hornstone.--_adj._
CHERT'Y, like or containing chert. [Prob. Celt.; Ir. _ceart_, a pebble.]

CHERUB, cher'ub, _n._ a winged creature with human face, represented as
associated with Jehovah, esp. drawing his chariot-throne: a celestial
spirit: a beautiful child:--_pl._ CHER'UBS, CHER'UBIM, CHER'UBIMS.--_adjs._
CHERU'BIC, -AL, CHERUBIM'IC, angelic.--_adv._ CHERU'BICALLY.--_n._
CHER'UBIN (_Shak._), a cherub. [Heb. _k'r[=u]b_, pl. _k'r[=u]b[=i]m_.]

CHERUP, cher'up, _v.t._ to urge on by chirruping.

CHERVIL, ch[.e]r'vil, _n._ an umbelliferous plant, cultivated as a
pot-herb, and used in soups and for a garnish, &c., in the same manner as
parsley. In Scotland the plant is commonly called _Myrrh_. [A.S. _cerfille_
(Ger. _kerbel_)--L. _cærefolium_--Gr. _chairephyllon_.]

CHESIL, chez'il, _n._ gravel: shingle: bran.--Also CHISEL. [A.S. _cisil_.]

CHESS, ches, _n._ a game of skill for two persons or parties, played with
figures or 'pieces,' which are moved on a chequered board.--_n._
CHESS'-BOARD, the board on which chess is played.--_n.pl._ CHESS'-MEN,
pieces used in chess. [Fr. _échecs_; It. _scacchi_; Ger. _schach_. Orig.
from Pers. _sháh_, a king.]

CHESS, ches, _n._ one of the parallel planks of a pontoon-bridge--generally
in _pl._

CHESSEL, ches'el, _n._ a cheese mould or vat.

CHEST, chest, _n._ a large strong box: the part of the body between the
neck and the abdomen, the thorax.--_adj._ CHEST'ED, having a chest: placed
in a chest.--_n._ CHEST'-NOTE, in singing or speaking, a deep note, the
lowest sound of the voice. [A.S. _cyst_; Scot. _kist_--L. _cista_--Gr.
_kist[=e]_.]

CHESTNUT, CHESNUT, ches'nut, _n._ a nut or fruit enclosed in a prickly
case: the tree that bears it: (_slang_) a stale joke or story.--_adj._ of a
chestnut colour, reddish-brown. [O. Fr. _chastaigne_--L. _castanea_--Gr.
_kastanon_, from _Castana_, in Pontus.]

CHETVERT, chet'vert, _n._ a Russian dry measure, equal to 8 _chevteriks_.

[Illustration]

CHEVAL-DE-FRISE, she-val'-de-fr[=e]z, _n._ a piece of timber armed with
spikes, used to defend a passage or to stop cavalry:--_pl._
CHEVAUX-DE-FRISE (she-v[=o]'-).--_n._ CHEVAL'-GLASS, a large glass or
mirror supported on a frame. [Fr.,--_cheval_, horse; _Frise_, Friesland.]

CHEVALIER, shev-a-l[=e]r', _n._ a cavalier: a knight: a gallant.
[Fr.,--_cheval_--L. _caballus_, a horse.]

CHEVELURE, shev'e-l[=u]r, _n._ a head of hair: a periwig: the nebulous part
of a comet. [Fr.,--L. _capillatura_--_capillus_, hair.]

CHEVEN, chev'en, _n._ the chub.--Also CHEV'IN.

CHEVEREL, chev'[.e]r-el, _n._ a kid: soft, flexible leather made of
kid-skin.--_adj._ like kid leather, pliable. [Fr. _chevreau_, a
kid--_chèvre_; L. _capra_, a goat.]

CHEVESAILE, chev'e-s[=a]l, _n._ an ornamental collar of a coat. [O. Fr.
_chevesaile_--_chevece_, the neck.]

CHEVIOT, ch[=e]'vi-ot, or chev'i-ot, _n._ a hardy breed of short-wooled
sheep reared on the _Cheviot_ Hills: a cloth made from their wool.

CHEVISANCE, shev'i-zäns, _n._ (_Spens._) achievement, performance.
[Fr.,--_chevir_, to accomplish; _chef_, the head, the end.]

[Illustration]

CHEVRON, shev'ron, _n._ a rafter: (_her._) the representation of two
rafters of a house meeting at the top: the V-shaped band of worsted braid
or gold lace worn on the sleeve of a non-commissioned officer's
coat.--_adjs._ CHEVRONE', CHEV'RONED. [Fr. _chevron_ (Sp. _cabrio_), a
rafter--L. _capreolus_, dim. of _caper_, a goat.]

CHEVY, chev'i, CHIVY, chiv'i, _n._ a cry, shout: a hunt.--_v.t._ to chase.
[Perh. from 'Chevy Chase,' a well-known ballad relating a Border battle.]

CHEW, ch[=oo], _v.t._ to cut and bruise with the teeth: to masticate:
(_fig._) to meditate, reflect.--_n._ action of chewing: a quid of
tobacco.--_ns._ CHEW'ET, a kind of pie or pudding made of various
ingredients mixed together; CHEW'ING-GUM, a preparation made from a gum
called _chicle_, produced by a Mexican tree allied to the india-rubber
tree, sweetened and flavoured.--CHEW THE CUD, to masticate a second time
food that has already been swallowed and passed into the first stomach: to
ruminate in thought. [A.S. _ceówan_; Ger. _kauen_; cf. JAW.]

CHEWET, ch[=oo]'et, _n._ a chough; (_Shak._) a chatterer. [Fr. _chouette_,
an owl.]

CHIAN, k[=i]'an, _adj._ pertaining to _Chios_ in the Ægean Sea.

CHIANTI, k[=e]-an'ti, _n._ a red wine of Tuscany.

CHIAROSCURO, kyär'o-sk[=u]-ro, _n._ distribution or blending of light and
shade, the art of representing light in shadow and shadow in light.

CHIASM, k[=i]'azm, _n._ (_anat._) a decussation or intersection, esp. that
of the optic nerves--also CHIAS'MA.--_n._ CHIAS'MUS (_rhet._), contrast by
parallelism in reverse order, as 'Do not live to eat, but eat to
live.'--_adj._ CHIAS'TIC. [Gr. _chiasma_, two lines crossed as in the
letter X.]

CHIAUS, chows, _n._ Same as CHOUSE.

CHIBOUK, CHIBOUQUE, chi-book', _n._ a long straight-stemmed Turkish pipe
for smoking. [Turk.]

CHIC, sh[=e]k, _n._ style, fashion: adroitness.--_adj._ stylish, 'up to the
mark.' [Fr.]

CHICA, ch[=e]'ka, _n._ an orange-red dye-stuff, obtained by boiling the
leaves of the Bignonia, a climber of the banks of the Cassiquiare and the
Orinoco. [Native name.]

CHICANE, shi-k[=a]n', _v.i._ to use shifts and tricks.--_v.t._ to
deceive.--_n._ a trick or artifice.--_ns._ CHIC[=A]'NER, one who chicanes:
a quibbler; CHIC[=A]'NERY, trickery or artifice, esp. in legal proceedings:
quibbling; CHIC[=A]'NING, quibbling. [Fr. _chicane_, sharp practice at law,
most prob. from Late Gr. _tzykanion_, a game at mall, _tzykaniz-ein_, to
play at mall--Pers. _tchaug[=a]n_, a crooked mallet.]

CHICCORY. See CHICORY.

CHICH, chich, _n._ a dwarf pea. Same as CHICK-PEA.

CHICHA, ch[=e]ch'a, _n._ a South American liquor fermented from maize.
[Haytian.]

CHICK, chik, _n._ the young of fowls, esp. of the hen: a child, as a term
of endearment.--_ns._ CHICK'A-BID'DY, CHICK'-A-DID'DLE, terms of endearment
addressed to children; CHICK'EN, the young of birds, esp. of the hen: its
flesh: a child: a faint-hearted person; CHICK'EN-HAZ'ARD, a game at dice
(see HAZARD); CHICK'EN-HEART, a cowardly person.--_adj._
CHICK'EN-HEART'ED.--_ns._ CHICK'EN-POX, a contagious febrile disease,
chiefly of children, and bearing some resemblance to a very mild form of
small-pox; CHICK'LING, a little chicken; CHICK'WEED, a species of
stitchwort, and one of the most common weeds of gardens and cultivated
fields--for making poultices, and for feeding cage-birds, which are very
fond of its leaves and seeds.--MOTHER CAREY'S CHICKEN, a sailor's name for
the Stormy Petrel; NO CHICKEN, one no longer young. [A.S. _cicen_; cf. Dut.
_kieken_, Ger. _küchlein_.]

CHICK-PEA, chik'-p[=e], _n._ a dwarf species of pea cultivated for food in
the south of Europe and other places. [Fr. _chiche_--L. _cicer_, and PEA.]

CHICORY, CHICCORY, chik'o-ri, _n._ a plant whose long carrot-like root is
ground to adulterate coffee.--Also SUC'CORY. [Fr. _chicorée_--L.
_cichorium_, succory--Gr. _kich[=o]rion_.]

CHIDE, ch[=i]d, _v.t._ to scold, rebuke, reprove by words: to be noisy
about, as the sea.--_v.i._ to make a snarling, murmuring sound, as a dog or
trumpet:--_pr.p._ chid'ing; _pa.t._ chid, (_obs._) ch[=o]de; _pa.p._ chid,
chidd'en.--_ns._ CHID'ER (_Shak._), a quarrelsome person; CHID'ING,
scolding. [A.S. _cídan_.]

CHIEF, ch[=e]f, _adj._ head: principal, highest, first: (_Scot._)
intimate.--_adv._ chiefly.--_n._ a head or principal person: a leader: the
principal part or top of anything: (_her._) an ordinary, consisting of the
upper part of the field cut off by a horizontal line, generally made to
occupy one-third of the area of the shield.--_ns._ CHIEF'-BAR'ON, the
President of the Court of Exchequer; CHIEF'DOM, CHIEF'SHIP, state of being
chief: sovereignty; CHIEF'ERY, an Irish chieftaincy: the dues paid to a
chief; CHIEF'ESS, a female chief; CHIEF'-JUS'TICE (see JUSTICE).--_adj._
CHIEF'LESS, without a chief or leader.--_adv._ CHIEF'LY, in the first
place: principally: for the most part.--_ns._ CHIEF'RY, a rent paid to the
supreme lord: a chief's lands; CHIEF'TAIN, the head of a clan: a leader or
commander:--_fem._ CHIEF'TAINESS; CHIEF'TAINCY, CHIEF'TAINSHIP;
CHIEF'TAINRY.--IN CHIEF (_her._) means that the charge is borne in the
upper part of the shield: applied to holding land directly from the
sovereign: at the head, as commander-_in-chief_. [Fr. _chef_--L. _caput_,
the head.]

CHIELD, ch[=e]ld, _n._ (_Scot._) a lad, a young man.--Also CHIEL. [A form
of CHILD.]

CHIFF-CHAFF, chif'-chaf, _n._ a small species of Warbler, so called from
the resemblance of its notes to the syllables which form its name.

CHIFFON, shif'ong, _n._ any merely ornamental part of a woman's
dress.--_n._ CHIFFONIER', an ornamental cupboard: (_Fr._) a rag-picker.
[Fr.--_chiffe_, rag.]

CHIFFRE, sh[=e]'fr, _n._ (_mus._) a figure used to denote the harmony.
[Fr.]

CHIG, chig, _v.t._ (_prov._) to chew.--_n._ a chew, quid.

CHIGNON, sh[=e]'nyong, _n._ a general term for the long back-hair of women,
when gathered up and folded into a roll on the back of the head and neck.
[Fr., meaning first the nape of the neck, the joints of which are like the
links of a chain--_chaînon_, the link of a chain--_chaîne_, a chain.]

CHIGOE, chig'[=o], CHIGRE, CHIGGER, chig'[.e]r, _n._ a species of flea of
the West Indies, the female of which buries itself beneath the toe-nails,
and produces troublesome sores. [Fr. _chique_.]

CHIKARA, chi-kä'rä', _n._ a four-horned goat-like antelope of Bengal.

CHIKARA, chik'a'rä, _n._ a Hindu musical instrument of the violin class.

CHILBLAIN, chil'bl[=a]n, _n._ a localised inflammation of the skin which
occurs in cold weather on hands and feet, more rarely on ears and nose.
[CHILL and BLAIN.]

CHILD, ch[=i]ld, _n._ an infant or very young person: (_Shak._) a female
infant: one intimately related to one older: expressing origin or relation,
e.g. child of the East, child of shame, child of God, &c.: a disciple: a
youth of gentle birth, esp. in ballads, &c.--sometimes CHILDE and CHYLDE:
(_pl._) offspring: descendants: inhabitants:--_pl._ CHIL'DREN.--_ns._
CHILD'-BEAR'ING, the act of bringing forth children; CHILD'BED, the state
of a woman brought to bed with child; CHILD'BIRTH, the giving birth to a
child: parturition; CHILD'-CROW'ING, a nervous affection with spasm of the
muscles closing the glottis.--_adj._ CHILD'ED (_Shak._), possessed of a
child.--_n._ CHILD'HOOD, state of being a child: the time of one's being a
child.--_adjs._ CHILD'ING (_Shak._), fruitful, teeming; CHILD'ISH, of or
like a child: silly: trifling.--_adv._ CHILD'ISHLY.--_ns._ CHILD'ISHNESS,
CHILD'NESS, what is natural to a child: puerility.--_adjs._ CHILD'LESS,
without children; CHILD'-LIKE, like a child: becoming a child: docile:
innocent.--_n._ CHILD'-WIFE, a very young wife.--CHILD'S PLAY, something
very easy to do: something slight.--FROM or OF A CHILD, since the days of
childhood.--SECOND CHILDHOOD, the childishness of old age.--WITH CHILD,
pregnant, e.g. GET WITH CHILD, BE or GO WITH CHILD. [A.S. _cild_, pl.
_cild_, later _cildru_, _-ra_. The Ger. equivalent word is _kind_.]

CHILDERMAS-DAY, chil'd[.e]r-mas-d[=a], _n._ an anniversary in the Church of
England, called also _Innocents' Day_, held 28th December, to commemorate
the slaying of the children by Herod. [CHILD, MASS, and DAY.]

CHILIAD, kil'i-ad, _n._ the number 1000: 1000 of anything.--_ns._
CHIL'IAGON, a plane figure having 1000 angles; CHIL'IAH[=E]DRON, a solid
figure having 1000 sides; CHIL'IARCH, a leader or commander of a thousand
men; CHIL'IARCHY, the position of chiliarch; CHIL'IASM, the doctrine that
Christ will reign bodily upon the earth for 1000 years; CHIL'IAST, one who
holds this opinion. [Gr.,--_chilioi_, 1000.]

CHILL, chil, _n._ coldness: a cold that causes shivering: anything that
damps or disheartens.--_adj._ shivering with cold: slightly cold: opposite
of _cordial_.--_v.i._ to grow cold.--_v.t._ to make chill or cold: to blast
with cold: to discourage.--_adj._ CHILLED, made cold: hardened by chilling,
as iron.--_n._ CHILL'INESS.--_adj._ CHILL'ING, cooling, cold.--_n._
CHILL'NESS.--_adj._ CHILLY, that chills: somewhat chill.--TAKE THE CHILL
OFF, to give a slight heat: to make lukewarm. [A.S. _cele_, _ciele_, cold.
See COLD, COOL.]

CHILLI, chil'li, _n._ the seed pod or fruit of the capsicum, extremely
pungent and stimulant, and employed in sauces, mixed pickles, &c.; when
dried and ground, forms the spice called Cayenne pepper. [The Mexican
name.]

CHILLUM, chil'um, _n._ the part of a hookah containing the tobacco and
charcoal balls: a hookah itself: the act of smoking it. [Hind. _chilam_.]

CHILTERN HUNDREDS. See HUNDREDS.

CHIME, ch[=i]m, _n._ the harmonious sound of bells or other musical
instruments: agreement of sound or of relation: harmony: (_pl._) a set of
bells.--_v.i._ to sound in harmony: to jingle: to accord or agree: to
rhyme.--_v.t._ to strike, or cause to sound in harmony: to say words over
mechanically.--CHIME IN, to join in, in agreement; CHIME IN WITH, to agree,
or fall in with. [M. E. _chimbe_, prob. O. Fr. _cymbale_--L. _cymbalum_, a
cymbal.]

CHIME, CHIMB, ch[=i]m, _n._ the rim formed by the ends of the staves of a
cask: (_naut._) a hollowed or bevelled channel in the waterway of a ship's
deck. [Cog. with Dut. _kim_, Ger. _kimme_, edge.]

CHIMER, shim'er, CHIMERE, shi-m[=e]r, _n._ the upper robe worn by a bishop,
to which lawn sleeves are attached. [O. Fr. _chamarre_; Sp. _zamarra_,
_chamarra_, sheepskin.]

CHIMERA, CHIMÆRA, ki-m[=e]'ra, _n._ a fabulous, fire-spouting monster, with
a lion's head, a serpent's tail, and a goat's body: any idle or wild fancy:
a picture of an animal having its parts made up of various animals: a genus
of cartilaginous fishes, often ranked along with the sharks and
rays.--_adjs._ CHIMER'IC, -AL, of the nature of a chimera: wild:
fanciful.--_adv._ CHIMER'ICALLY. [L.,--Gr. _chimaira_, a she-goat.]

CHIMNEY, chim'ni, _n._ a passage for the escape of smoke or heated air from
a furnace: in houses, that part of the passage which is built above the
roof: anything of a like shape.--_ns._ CHIM'NEY-CAN, or -POT, a cylindrical
pipe of earthenware or other material placed at the top of a chimney to
increase the draught; CHIM'NEY-COR'NER, in old chimneys, the space between
the fire and the wall forming the sides of the fireplace: fireside,
commonly spoken of as the place for the aged and infirm; CHIM'NEY-PIECE, a
shelf over the fireplace; CHIM'NEY-SHAFT, the stalk of a chimney which
rises above the building; CHIM'NEY-STACK, a group of chimneys carried up
together; CHIM'NEY-STALK, a very tall chimney; CHIM'NEY-SWALL'OW, the
_Hirundo rustica_, a very common swallow: the chimney-swift;
CHIM'NEY-SWEEP, CHIM'NEY-SWEEP'ER, one who sweeps or cleans chimneys;
CHIM'NEY-TOP, the top of a chimney.--CHIMNEY-POT HAT, a familiar name for
the ordinary cylindrical hat of gentlemen. [Fr. _cheminée_--L.
_cam[=i]nus_; Gr. _kaminos_, a furnace.]

CHIMPANZEE, chim-pan'z[=e], _n._ an African ape, the highest of the
anthropoid or more man-like apes, belonging to the same genus as the
gorilla. [West African.]

CHIN, chin, _n._ the jutting part of the face below the mouth.--UP TO THE
CHIN, deeply immersed. [A.S. _cin_; Ger. _kinn_, Gr. _genys_.]

CHINA, ch[=i]n'a, _n._ fine kind of earthenware, originally made in
_China_: porcelain.--_ns._ CHIN'A-BARK, a common name of cinchona bark
(derived not from the empire of China, but from. _Kina_ or _Quina_, the
Peruvian name of cinchona--see QUININE); CHIN'A-CLAY, a fine white clay
used in making porcelain; CHIN'A-GRASS (_Boehmeria nivea_), a small
shrubby-like plant, allied to the nettle, native to China; the fibre of
this plant used for making ropes and cordage, and also in China for the
manufacture of grass-cloth; CHIN'A-INK (see INK); CHIN'AMAN, a native of
China; CHIN'A-ROOT, the root-stock of a Chinese shrubby plant, formerly
used in Europe medicinally, but still in the East as a remedy in rheumatic
or syphilitic cases; CHIN'A-ROSE, a name applied to several varieties of
garden roses; CHIN'A-SHOP, a shop in which china, crockery, &c. are sold;
CHIN'A-WARE, porcelain-ware; CHINEE', a Chinaman.--_adj._ CHINESE', of or
belonging to China.--CHINA ASTER (see ASTER).

CHINCH, chinch, _n._ the bed-bug in America. [Sp.,--L. _cimic-em_.]

CHINCHILLA, chin-chil'la, _n._ a small rodent quadruped of South America,
valued for its soft gray fur: the fur itself. [Sp.]

CHINCOUGH, chin'kof, _n._ a disease, esp. of children, attended with
violent fits of coughing: whooping-cough. [For _chink-cough_; Scot.
_kink-host_, Dut. _kinkhoest_. See CHINK and COUGH.]

CHINE, ch[=i]n, _n._ the spine or backbone: a piece of the backbone and
adjoining parts for cooking: a ridge, crest.--_v.t._ (_Spens._) to break
the back. [O. Fr. _eschine_, prob. from Old High Ger. _scina_, a pin,
thorn.]

CHINÉ, sh[=e]-n[=a]', _adj._ mottled in appearance, the warp being dyed in
different colours, or from threads of different colours twisted together.
[Fr., lit. 'Chinese.']

CHINE, ch[=i]n, _n._ a ravine. [A.S. _cinu_, a cleft.]

CHINK, chingk, _n._ a cleft, a narrow opening.--_v.i._ to crack.--_v.t._ to
fill up cracks.--_adj._ CHINK'Y, full of chinks. [Apparently formed upon M.
E. _chine_, a crack--A.S. _cinu_, a cleft.]

CHINK, chingk, _n._ the clink, as of coins.--_v.i._ to give forth a sharp
sound. [From the sound.]

CHINK, chingk, _n._ a gasp for breath.--_v.i._ to gasp--the northern form
_Kink_. [Cf. Dut. _kinken_, to cough; Ger. _keichen_, to gasp.]

CHINKAPIN, ching'ka-pin, _n._ the dwarf chestnut, a native of the United
States.--Also CHIN'CAPIN. [Ind.]

CHINOOK, chin-[=oo]k', _n._ a trader's jargon, consisting of words from
French and English, as well as Chinook and other Indian tongues.

CHINTZ, chints, _n._ a highly glazed printed calico, with a pattern
generally in several colours on a white or light-coloured ground. [Orig.
pl. of Hind, _chint_, spotted cotton-cloth.]

CHIP, chip, _v.t._ to chop or cut into small pieces: to hew: of chickens,
to break the shell of the egg in hatching: to pare away the crust of bread,
&c.: to bet:--_pr.p._ chip'ping; _pa.p._ chipped.--_n._ a small piece of
wood or other substance chopped off: (_slang_) a sovereign.--_n._
CHIP'-HAT, a cheap kind of hat, made of what is popularly called Brazilian
grass, but really consisting of strips of the leaves of a palm (_Chamærops
argentea_) imported from Cuba.--_adj._ CHIP'PY, abounding in chips: dry as
a chip: seedy from an overdose of liquor.--CHIP IN, to supply one's
part.--A CHIP OF THE OLD BLOCK, one with the characteristics of his father.
[M. E. _chippen_, to cut in pieces. Conn. with CHOP.]

CHIPMUCK, CHIPMUNK, chip'muk, -mungk, _n._ a kind of squirrel, common in
North America.

CHIPPENDALE, chip'pen-d[=a]l, _adj._ applied to a light style of
drawing-room furniture, after the name of a well-known cabinet-maker of the
18th century. The name is also applied to a style of book plates.

CHIRAGRA, k[=i]-rag'ra, _n._ gout in the hand.--_adjs._ CHIRAG'RIC, -AL.
[Gr.]

CHIRIMOYA. See CHERIMOYER.

CHIRK, ch[.e]rk, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to grate: to chirp or squeak. [A.S.
_cearcian_, to creak.]

CHIRL, chirl, _v.i._ to emit a low sound: to warble.--_n._ a kind of
musical warble. [Scot., from the sound. See CHIRR.]

CHIRM, ch[.e]rm, _v.i._ to cry out: to chirp.--_n._ noise, din, hum of
voices. [A.S. _cirman_, to cry out; cf. Dut. _kermen_.]

CHIROGNOMY, k[=i]-rog'n[=o]-mi, _n._ the so-called art or science of
judging character from the lines of the hand, palmistry.--_adj._
CHIROGNOM'IC. [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, _gn[=o]m[=e]_, understanding.]

CHIROGRAPH, k[=i]-rog-raf', _n._ any written or signed document.--_ns._
CHIROG'RAPHER, CHIROG'RAPHIST, one who professes the art of
writing---_adj._ CHIROGRAPH'IC--_n._ CHIROG'RAPHY, the art of writing, or
penmanship. [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, _graph[=e]_, writing.]

CHIROLOGY, k[=i]-rol'o-ji, _n._ the art of discoursing with the hands or by
signs, as the deaf and dumb do.--_n._ CHIROL'OGIST, one who converses by
signs with the hands. [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, _logia_, a discourse.]

CHIROMANCY. Same as CHEIROMANCY.

CHIROPODIST, k[=i]-rop'o-dist, _n._ a hand and foot doctor: one who removes
corns, bunions, warts, &c. [Gr. _cheir_, the hand, and _pous_, _podos_, the
foot.]

CHIRP, ch[.e]rp, _n._ the sharp, shrill sound of certain birds and
insects.--_v.i._ to make such a sound; to talk in a happy and lively
strain.--_v.t._ to cheer.--_n._ CHIRP'ER, a little bird: a
chirping-cup.--_adj._ CHIRP'ING, merry: cheering.--_n._ CHIRP'ING-CUP, a
cup that cheers.--_adj._ CHIRP'Y, lively: merry. [From the sound.]

CHIRR, ch[.e]r, _v.i._ to chirp, as is done by the cricket or grasshopper.
[From the sound.]

CHIRRUP, chir'up, _v.i._ to chirp: to make a sound with the mouth to urge
on a horse: to cheer up. [Lengthened form of CHIRP, and then brought into
connection with _cheer up_.]

CHIRT, ch[.e]rt, _n._ a squeeze.--_v.t._ to squeeze. [Conn. with CHIRR.]

CHIRUR'GEON, CHIRUR'GERY, CHIRUR'GICAL, old forms of SURGEON, SURGERY,
SURGICAL.--_adv._ CHIRUR'GEONLY (_Shak._), in a manner becoming a surgeon.
[Fr. _chirurgien_--Gr. _cheirourgos_--_cheir_, the hand, _ergon_, a work.]

CHISEL, chiz'el, _n._ an iron or steel tool to cut or hollow out wood,
stone, &c.: esp. the tool of the sculptor.--_v.t._ to cut, carve, &c. with
a chisel: (_slang_) to cheat:--_pr.p._ chis'elling; _pa.p._
chis'elled.--_adj._ CHIS'ELLED, cut with a chisel; (_fig._) having sharp
outlines, as cut by a chisel.--_n._ CHIS'ELLING.--_adj._
CHIS'EL-SHAPED.--_n._ CHIS'EL-TOOTH, the scalpriform perennial incisor of a
rodent. [O. Fr. _cisel_--L. _cæd[)e]re_, to cut.]

CHISEL, chiz'el, _n._ See CHESIL.

CHISLEU, chis'l[=u], _n._ the ninth month of the Jewish year, including
parts of November and December. [Heb.]

CHIT, chit, _n._ a note: an order or pass.--Also CHIT'TY. [Hind.
_chitthi_.]

CHIT, chit, _n._ a baby: a lively or pert young child: contemptuously, a
young woman or girl. [A.S. _cith_, a young tender shoot.]

CHITCHAT, chit'chat, _n._ chatting or idle talk: prattle: gossip. [A
reduplication of CHAT.]

CHITIN, k[=i]'tin, _n._ the substance which forms most of the hard parts of
jointed footed animals.--_adj._ CH[=I]'TINOUS. [Fr. _chitine_--Gr.
_chiton_, a tunic.]

CHITON, k[=i]'ton, _n._ the ancient Greek tunic: a genus of marine
molluscs. [Gr. _chit[=o]n_, a tunic]

CHITTER, chit'[.e]r, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to shiver.--_n._ CHITT'ERING. [Cf.
CHATTER.]

CHITTERLING, chit'[.e]r-ling, _n._ the smaller intestines of a pig or other
edible animal: a frill--prov. forms, _Chidling_, _Chitling_, _Chitter_.
[Ety. dub.]

CHIVALRY, shiv'al-ri, _n._ the usages and qualifications of chevaliers or
knights: bravery and courtesy: the system of knighthood in feudal
times.--_adjs._ CHIVAL'RIC, CHIV'ALROUS, pertaining to chivalry: bold:
gallant.--_adv._ CHIV'ALROUSLY.--_n._ CHIV'ALROUSNESS. [Fr.
_chevalerie_--_cheval_--Low L. _caballus_, a horse.]

CHIVE, ch[=i]v, _n._ an herb like the leek and onion, with small, flat,
clustered bulbs: a small bulb.--Also CIVE. [Fr. _cive_--L. _cæpa_, an
onion.]

CHIVY, chiv'vy, or CHEVY, chev'vy, _n._ a hunting cry.--_v.t._ to
chase.--_v.i._ to scamper. [Prob. from the Border battle of _Chevy_ Chase.]

CHLAMYS, kl[=a]'mis, _n._ an ancient Greek short cloak or mantle for men: a
purple cope: a genus of phytophagous beetles. [Gr.]

CHLOASMA, kl[=o]-az'ma, _n._ a skin-disease marked by yellowish-brown
patches. [Gr. _chlo[=e]_, verdure.]

CHLORINE, kl[=o]'rin, _n._ a yellowish-green gas with a peculiar and
suffocating odour.--_ns._ CHL[=O]'RAL, a limpid, colourless, oily liquid,
with a peculiar penetrating odour, formed when anhydrous alcohol is acted
on by dry chlorine gas; CHL[=O]'RALISM, the habit of using chloral, a
morbid state induced by such; CHL[=O]'RATE, a salt composed of chloric acid
and a base.--_adj._ CHL[=O]'RIC, of or from chlorine.--_n._ CHL[=O]'RIDE, a
compound of chlorine with some other substance, as potash, soda,
&c.--_v.t._ CHL[=O]'RIDISE, to convert into a chloride: (_phot._) to cover
with chloride of silver--also CHL[=O]'RIDATE.--_n._ CHLORIN[=A]'TION, the
process of getting gold, &c., out of ore by the use of chlorine.--_v.t._
CHL[=O]'RINISE, to combine or otherwise treat with chlorine--also
CHL[=O]'RINATE.--_ns._ CHL[=O]'RITE, a mineral consisting of silica,
alumina, &c., in variable proportions--it is of a green colour, rather
soft, and is easily scratched with a knife; CHL[=O]'RODYNE, a patent
medicine containing opium, chloroform, &c., used for allaying pain and
inducing sleep; CHL[=O]'ROFORM, a limpid, mobile, colourless, volatile
liquid, with a characteristic odour and a strong sweetish taste, used to
induce insensibility.--_adj._ CHL[=O]'ROID, like chlorine.--_ns._
CHL[=O]ROM'ETER, an instrument for measuring the bleaching powers of
chloride of lime; CHL[=O]ROM'ETRY, the process of testing the decolouring
power of any compound of chlorine; CHL[=O]'ROPHYL, the ordinary colouring
matter of vegetation, consisting of minute soft granules in the cells;
CHLOR[=O]'SIS, properly _green-sickness_, a peculiar form of anæmia or
bloodlessness, common in young women, and connected with the disorders
incident to the critical period of life.--_adjs._ CHL[=O]ROT'IC, pertaining
to chlorosis; CHL[=O]'ROUS, full of chlorine.--CHLORIC ACID, a syrupy
liquid, with faint chlorine colour and acid reaction. [Gr. _chl[=o]ros_,
pale-green.]

CHOBDAR, chob'dar, _n._ a frequent attendant of Indian nobles, and formerly
also of Anglo-Indian officials of rank, carrying a staff overlaid with
silver. [Pers.]

CHOCK, chok, _v.t._ to fasten as with a block or wedge.--_n._ a wedge to
keep a cask from rolling: a log.--_adjs._ CHOCK'-FULL, CHOKE'-FULL, quite
full; CHOCK'-TIGHT, very tight. [See CHOKE.]

CHOCOLATE, chok'[=o]-l[=a]t, _n._ a preparation of the seeds of _Theobroma
cacao_, made by grinding the seeds mixed with water to a very fine paste: a
beverage made by dissolving this paste in boiling water.--_adj._
chocolate-coloured, dark reddish-brown: made of or flavoured with
chocolate. [Sp. _chocolate_; from Mex. _chocolatl_, chocolate.]

CHODE, ch[=o]d, an obsolete _pa.t._ of CHIDE.

CHOICE, chois, _n._ act or power of choosing: the thing chosen:
alternative: preference: the preferable or best part.--_adj._ worthy of
being chosen: select: appropriate.--_adjs._ CHOICE'-DRAWN (_Shak._),
selected with care; CHOICE'FUL (_Spens._), making many choices,
fickle.--_adv._ CHOICE'LY, with discrimination or care.--_n._ CHOICE'NESS,
particular value: excellence: nicety.--HOBSON'S CHOICE, the alternative of
a thing offered or nothing, from _Hobson_, a Cambridge carrier and
innkeeper, who insisted on lending out the horse nearest the stable door,
or none at all.--MAKE CHOICE OF, to select; TAKE ONE'S CHOICE, to take what
one wishes. [Fr. _choix_--_choisir_; cf. CHOOSE.]

CHOIR, kw[=i]r, _n._ a chorus or band of singers, esp. those belonging to a
church: the part of a church appropriated to the singers: the part of a
cathedral separated from the nave by a rail or screen.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to
sing in chorus.--_ns._ CHOIR'-OR'GAN, one of the departments of a cathedral
organ, standing behind the _great-organ_, having its tones less powerful,
and more fitted to accompany the voice; CHOIR'SCREEN, a screen of
lattice-work, separating the choir from the nave, so as to prevent general
access thereto, though not to interrupt either sight or sound.--_adj._
CH[=O]'RAL, belonging to a chorus or choir.--_ns._ CH[=O]RAL', CHORALE', a
simple harmonised composition, with slow rhythm: a tune written for a psalm
or hymn: in R.C. usage, any part of the service sung by the whole
choir.--_adv._ CH[=O]'RALLY, in the manner of a chorus: so as to suit a
choir. [Fr. _choeur_--L. _chorus_--Gr. _choros_.]

CHOKE, ch[=o]k, _v.t._ to throttle: to suffocate: to stop or obstruct: to
suppress.--_v.i._ to be choked or suffocated.--_n._ the action of
choking.--_n._ CHOKE'-BORE, the bore of a gun when narrowed at the muzzle
so as to concentrate the shot: a shot-gun so bored.--_v.t._ to bore in such
a way.--_n._ CHOKE'-CHERR'Y, a name given to certain nearly allied species
of cherry, natives of North America, whose fruit, though at first rather
agreeable, is afterwards astringent in the mouth.--_adj._ CHOKED,
suffocated, clogged.--_n._ CHOKE'DAMP, the carbonic acid gas given off by
coal which accumulates in coal-mines, and may suffocate those exposed to
it.--_adj._ CHOKE'-FULL (see CHOCK-FULL).--_ns._ CHOK'ER, one who chokes: a
neckerchief; CHOK'ING, suffocation.--_adj._ smothering.--_adj._ CHOK'Y,
tending to choke: inclined to choke.--CHOKE OFF, to put an end to, as if by
choking; CHOKE UP, to obstruct completely, to suffocate.--WHITE CHOKER, a
white neckerchief worn by clergymen, &c. [Prob. from sound.]

CHOKY, ch[=o]'ki, _n._ a prison: a toll-station. [Hind.]

CHOLÆMIA, CHOLEMIA, ko-l[=e]'mi-a, _n._ a morbid accumulation of the
constituents of bile in the blood.--_adj._ CHOLÆ'MIC. [Gr. _chol[=e]_,
bile, _haima_, blood.]

CHOLAGOGUE, kol'a-gog, _n._ a purgative causing evacuations of
bile.--_adj._ CHOLAGOG'IC. [Gr. _chol[=e]_, bile, _ag[=o]gos_, leading.]

CHOLER, kol'[.e]r, _n._ the bile: (_Shak._) biliousness: anger,
irascibility.--_adj._ CHOL'ERIC, full of choler: passionate.
[Fr.,--L.,--Gr. _cholera_--_chol[=e]_, bile.]

CHOLERA, kol'[.e]r-a, _n._ a highly infectious and deadly disease
characterised by bilious vomiting and purging.--_adj._
CHOLER[=A]'IC.--BRITISH CHOLERA, an acute catarrhal affection of the mucous
membrane of the stomach and small intestines. [Gr. _cholera_.]

CHOLESTERINE, ko-les'te-rin, _n._ a substance occurring abundantly in bile
and biliary calculi, probably a monovalent alcohol.--_adj._ CHOLESTER'IC.
[Gr. _chol[=e]_, bile, _stereos_, solid.]

CHOLIAMB, k[=o]'li-amb, _n._ a variety of iambic trimeter, having a trochee
for an iambus as the sixth foot.--_adj._ CHOLIAM'BIC. [L.,--Gr.
_ch[=o]liambos_--_ch[=o]los_, lame, _iambos_, iambus.]

CHOLTRY, ch[=o]l'tri, _n._ a khan or caravansary for travellers: a shed
used as a place of assembly.--Also CHOUL'TRY. [Malayalam.]

CHONDRIFY, kon'dri-f[=i], _v.t._ to convert into cartilage.--_v.i._ to be
converted into cartilage.--_n._ CHONDRIFIC[=A]'TION. [Gr. _chondros_,
cartilage.]

CHONDROID, kon'droid, _adj._ cartilaginous.--_ns._ CHON'DRIN, the proper
substance of cartilage; CHONDR[=I]'TIS, inflammation of cartilage;
CHONDROGEN'ESIS, the formation of cartilage.--_adj._
CHONDROGENET'IC.--_ns._ CHONDROG'RAPHY, a description of the cartilages;
CHONDROL'OGY, the knowledge of the cartilages.

CHONDROPTERYGIAN, kon-drop-te-rij'i-an, _adj._ gristly-finned, belonging to
the _Chondropterygii_, a group of fishes variously defined in different
systems. [Gr. _chondros_, cartilage, _pterygion_, dim. of _pteryx_, a
wing.]

CHOOSE, ch[=oo]z, _v.t._ to take one thing in preference to another: to
select.--_v.i._ to will or determine: to think fit:--_pa.t._ ch[=o]se;
_pa.p._ ch[=o]s'en.--_ns._ CHOOS'ER (_Shak._), one who chooses; CHOOS'ING,
choice: selection.--CANNOT CHOOSE, can have no alternative.--NOT MUCH TO
CHOOSE BETWEEN, each about equally bad.--PICK AND CHOOSE, to select with
care. [A.S. _céosan_, Dut. _kiesen_.]

CHOP, chop, _v.t._ to cut with a sudden blow: to cut into small pieces:
(_Milton_) to change: to exchange or barter: (_Milton_) to trade in: to
bandy words.--_v.i._ to change about: to shift suddenly, as the wind.--_n._
a blow: a piece cut off: a slice of mutton or pork, containing a rib: a
change: vicissitude.--_ns._ CHOP'-HOUSE, a house where mutton-chops and
beef-steaks are served: an eating-house; CHOP'PER, one who or that which
chops: a cleaver; CHOP'PING-KNIFE, a knife for chopping or mincing
meat.--_adj._ CHOP'PY, full of chops or cracks: running in irregular
waves--also CHOP'PING.--CHOP AND CHANGE, to buy and sell: to change about;
CHOP AT, to aim a blow at; CHOP IN, to break in, interrupt; CHOP LOGIC, to
dispute in logical terms: to bandy words; CHOP UP, to cut into small
pieces.--A CHOP-LOGIC (_Shak._), a contentious fellow. [A form of CHAP.]

CHOP, chop, _n._ the chap or jaw, generally used in _pl._: a person with
fat cheeks: the mouth of anything, as a cannon.--_adj._ CHOP'-FALL'EN, lit.
having the chop or lower jaw fallen down: cast-down: dejected. [See CHAP
(3).]

CHOP, chop, _n._ in China and India, an official mark or seal: a license or
passport which has been sealed. [Hind. _chh[=a]p_, seal, impression.]

CHOPIN, chop'in, _n._ an old French liquid measure containing nearly an
English imperial pint: a Scotch measure containing about an English quart.
[O. Fr. _chopine_, Old Dut. _schoppe_; Scot. _chappin_, Ger. _schoppen_, a
pint.]

CHOPINE, chop-[=e]n', chop'in, _n._ a high clog or patten introduced into
England from Venice during the reign of Elizabeth. [Sp. _chapin_.]

CHOPPING, chop'ing, _adj._ stout, strapping, plump.

CHOP-STICKS, chop'-stiks, _n.pl._ two small sticks of wood, ivory, &c.,
used by the Chinese instead of knife and fork. [_Chop_, a corr. of _kih_,
quick.]

CHORAGUS, ko-r[=a]'gus, _n._ in Athens, the person appointed to organise
the chorus: the leader of a choir.--_adj._ CHORAG'IC, pertaining to a
choragus.--CHORAGIC MONUMENT, a small temple on which were dedicated the
tripods given in the Dionysian contests to the victorious chorus. [Gr.
_chor[=e]gos_--_choros_, chorus, and _agein_, to lead.]

CHORAL, CHORALE. See CHOIR.

CHORD, kord, _n._ (_mus._) the simultaneous and harmonious union of sounds
of a different pitch.--The COMMON CHORD is a note with its third and
perfect fifth reckoned upwards. [Formed from ACCORD.]

CHORD, kord, _n._ the string of a musical instrument: (_fig._) of the
emotions: (_geom._) a straight line joining the extremities of an arc: a
straight line joining any two points in the curve of a circle, ellipse, &c.
[L. _chorda_--Gr. _chord[=e]_, an intestine.]

CHOREA, ko-r[=e]'a, _n._ St Vitus's dance, a nervous disease causing
irregular and involuntary movements of the limbs or face. [L.,--Gr.
_choreia_, a dancing.]

CHOREE, k[=o]'r[=e], _n._ a trochee.--Also CHOR[=E]'US. [L.,--Gr.]

CHOREOGRAPHY. See CHORUS.

CHOREPISCOPAL, k[=o]-re-pis'ko-pal, _adj._ pertaining to a local or
suffragan bishop. [Gr. _ch[=o]ra_, place.]

CHORIAMB, k[=o]'ri-amb, _n._ a metrical foot of four syllables, the first
and last long, the two others short.--_adj._ and _n._ CHORIAM'BIC. [Gr.
_choriambos_--_choreios_, a trochee, _iambos_, iambus.]

CHORION, k[=o]'ri-on, _n._ the outer foetal envelope: the external membrane
of the seeds of plants:--_pl._ CH[=O]'RIA.--_adj._ CH[=O]'ROID. [Gr.]

CHOROGRAPHY, k[=o]-rog'ra-fi, _n._ the description of the geographical
features of a particular region.--_adjs._ CHOROGRAPH'IC, -AL;
CHOROLOG'ICAL.--_ns._ CHOROL'OGIST; CHOROL'OGY, the science of the
geographical distribution of plants and animals.

CHORUS, k[=o]'rus, _n._ a band of singers and dancers, esp. in the Greek
plays: a company of singers: that which is sung by a chorus: the
combination of several voices in one simultaneous utterance: the part of a
song in which the company join the singer.--_adj._ CHOREOGRAPH'IC.--_ns._
CHOREOG'RAPHY, CHOROG'RAPHY, the notation of dancing.--_adj._
CH[=O]'RIC.--_ns._ CH[=O]'RIST, CHOR'ISTER, a member of a choir. [L.,--Gr.
_choros_, dance.]

CHOSE, CHOSEN. See CHOOSE.

CHOUGH, chuf, _n._ a kind of jackdaw which frequents rocky places on the
seacoast. [A.S. _céo_; from the cry of the bird. See CAW.]

CHOULTRY. See CHOLTRY.

CHOUSE, chows, _n._ (_obs._) a cheat: one easily cheated: a trick.--_v.t._
to cheat, swindle. [Prob. from Turk. _chaush_, a messenger or envoy.]

CHOUT, chowt, _n._ one-fourth part of the revenue extorted by the Mahrattas
as blackmail: blackmail, extortion. [Hind. _chauth_, the fourth part.]

CHOW-CHOW, chow'-chow, _n._ a mixture of food such as the Chinese use, e.g.
preserved pickles.--_adj._ miscellaneous, mixed. [Pigeon-English.]

CHOWDER, chow'd[.e]r, _n._ a dish made of a mixture of fish and biscuits.
[Fr. _chaudière_, a pot.]

CHOWRY, chow'ri, _n._ an instrument used for driving away flies. [Hindi,
_chaunri_.]

CHREMATISTIC, kr[=e]-ma-tis'tik, _adj._ pertaining to finance.--_n._
CHREMATIS'TICS, the science of wealth. [Gr.,--_chr[=e]ma_, a thing.]

CHOY-ROOT. See SHAYA-ROOT.

CHRESTOMATHY, kres-tom'a-thi, _n._ a book of selections from foreign
languages, usually for beginners.--_adjs._ CHRESTOMATH'IC, -AL. [Gr.
_chr[=e]stos_, useful, _mathein_, to know.]

CHRISM, krizm, _n._ consecrated or holy oil: unction: confirmation:
chrisom. (q.v.).--_adj._ CHRIS'MAL, pertaining to chrism.--_n._ a case for
containing chrism: a pyx: a veil used in christening.--_ns._ CHRIS'MATORY,
a vessel for containing chrism; CHRIS'OM, a white cloth laid by the priest
on a child newly anointed with chrism after its baptism: the child
itself.--CHRISOM CHILD (_Shak._), a child still wearing the chrisom cloth:
an innocent child. [O. Fr. _chresme_ (Fr. _chrême_)--Gr. _chrisma_, from
_chriein_, _chrisein_, to anoint.]

CHRIST, kr[=i]st, _n._ the Anointed, the Messiah.--_ns._ CHRIST-CROSS-ROW
(kris'-kros-r[=o]), the alphabet, from the use in horn-books of having a
cross at the beginning; CHR[=I]ST'S-THORN, a kind of prickly shrub common
in Palestine and south of Europe, so called because supposed to have been
the plant from which the crown of thorns was made.--_v.t._ CHRISTEN
(kris'n), to baptise in the name of Christ: to give a name to.--_ns._
CHRIS'TENDOM, that part of the world in which Christianity is the received
religion: the whole body of Christians; CHRIS'TENING, the ceremony of
baptism; CHR[=I]ST'HOOD, the condition of being the Christ or Messiah;
CHRIST'IAN, a follower of Christ: (_coll._) a human being.--_adj._ relating
to Christ or His religion: being in the spirit of Christ.--_v.t._
CHRIST'IANISE, to make Christian: to convert to Christianity.--_ns._
CHRIST'IANISM, CHRISTIAN'ITY, the religion of Christ: the spirit of this
religion.--_adjs._ CHRIST'IAN-LIKE, CHRIST'IANLY.--_ns._ CHRIST'IANNESS,
CHRIST'LINESS.--_adjs._ CHRIST'LESS, CHRIST'LY.--CHRISTIAN ERA, the era
counted from the birth of Christ; CHRISTIAN NAME, the name given when
christened, as distinguished from the surname. [A.S. _crist_--Gr.
_Christos_--and _chriein_, _chrisein_, to anoint.]

CHRISTADELPHIAN, kris-ta-del'fi-an, _n._ a member of a small religious body
holding conditional immortality, denying a personal devil, &c.--sometimes
called _Thomasites_ from Dr John _Thomas_ of Brooklyn (1805-71). [Lit.
'Brethren of Christ,' Gr. _Christos_, Christ, and _adelphos_, brother.]

CHRISTMAS, kris'mas, _n._ an annual festival, originally a mass, in memory
of the birth of Christ, held on the 25th of December.--_ns._
CHRIST'MAS-BOX, a box containing Christmas presents: a Christmas gift;
CHRIST'MAS-CARD, a card, more or less ornamented, sent from friend to
friend at this season; CHRIST'MAS-EVE, the evening before Christmas;
CHRIST'MAS-ROSE, or -FLOW'ER, the _Helleborus niger_, flowering in winter;
CHRIST'MAS-TREE, a tree, usually fir, set up in a room, and loaded with
Christmas presents. [CHRIST and MASS.]

CHRISTOLOGY, kris-tol'o-ji, _n._ that branch of theology which treats of
the nature and person of Christ.--_adj._ CHRISTOLOG'ICAL.--_n._
CHRISTOL'OGIST. [Gr. _Christos_, and _logia_, a discourse.]

CHRISTOM, kris'um, _n._ (_Shak._). Same as CHRISOM, under CHRISM (q.v.).

CHRISTOPHANY, kris-tof'a-ni, _n._ an appearance of Christ to men. [Gr.
_Christos_, and _phainein_, to appear.]

CHROMATIC, kr[=o]-mat'ik, _adj._ relating to colours: coloured: (_mus._)
relating to notes in a melodic progression, which are raised or lowered by
accidentals, without changing the key of the passage, and also to chords in
which such notes occur.--_ns._ CHR[=O]M'ATE, a salt of chromic acid;
CHR[=O]MAT'ICS, the science of colours.--_v.t._ CHR[=O]'MATISE, to
impregnate with a chromate.--_ns._ CHR[=O]MATOG'RAPHY, a treatise on
colours; CHR[=O]MATOL'OGY, the science of colours, or a treatise thereon;
CHR[=O]MAT'OPHORE, one of the pigment-cells in animals: one of the granules
in protoplasm: one of the brightly coloured bead-like bodies in the oral
disc of certain actinias, &c.; CHR[=O]MATOP'SIA, coloured vision;
CHR[=O]'MATROPE, an arrangement in a magic-lantern by which effects like
those of the kaleidoscope are produced; CHR[=O]'MATYPE, CHR[=O]'MOTYPE, a
photographic process by which a coloured impression of a picture is
obtained.--_adj._ relating to the chromatype.--_ns._ CHR[=O]ME,
CHR[=O]'MIUM, a metal remarkable for the beautiful colours of its
compounds.--_adj._ CHR[=O]M'IC.--_ns._ CHR[=O]'MITE, a mineral consisting
of oxide of chromium and iron; CHR[=O]'MO-LITH'OGRAPH, or merely
CHR[=O]'MO, a lithograph printed in colours; CHR[=O]'MOLITHOG'RAPHY;
CHR[=O]'MOSPHERE, a layer of incandescent red gas surrounding the sun
through which the light of the photosphere passes--also CHR[=O]MAT'OSPHERE;
CHR[=O]'MO-TYPOG'RAPHY, typography in colours; CHR[=O]'MO-XY'LOGRAPH, a
picture printed in colours from wooden blocks;
CHR[=O]'MO-XYLOG'RAPHY.--CHROMATIC SCALE, a scale proceeding by semitones;
CHROMIC ACID, an acid of chromium, of an orange-red colour, much used in
dyeing and bleaching. [Gr. _chr[=o]matikos_--_chr[=o]ma_, colour.]

CHRONIC, -AL, kron'ik, -al, _adj._ lasting a long time: of a disease, deep
seated or long continued, as opposed to _acute_.--_n._ CHRON'IC, chronic
invalid. [Gr. _chronikos_--_chronos_, time.]

CHRONICLE, kron'i-kl, _n._ a bare record of events in order of time: a
history: (_pl._) name of two of the Old Testament books: a story,
account.--_v.t._ to record.--_n._ CHRON'ICLER, a historian. [O. Fr.
_chronique_--L.--Gr. _chronika_, annals--_chronos_, time.]

CHRONOGRAM, kron'o-gram, _n._ an inscription in which the time or date of
an event is given by certain of the letters printed larger than the rest.
[Gr. _chronos_, time, _gramma_, a letter--_graphein_, to write.]

CHRONOGRAPH, kron'o-graf, _n._ a chronogram: an instrument for taking exact
measurements of time, or for recording graphically the moment or duration
of an event.--_ns._ CHRONOG'RAPHER, a chronicler; CHRONOG'RAPHY,
chronology. [Gr. _chronos_, time, _graphein_, to write.]

CHRONOLOGY, kron-ol'o-ji, _n._ the science of time.--_ns._ CHRONOL'OGER,
CHRONOL'OGIST.--_adjs._ CHRONOLOG'IC, -AL.--_adv._ CHRONOLOG'ICALLY. [Gr.
_chronos_, time, _logia_, a discourse.]

CHRONOMETER, kron-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring time: a
watch.--_adjs._ CHRONOMET'RIC, -AL.--_n._ CHRONOM'ETRY, the art of
measuring time by means of instruments: measurement of time. [Gr.
_chronos_, and _metron_, a measure.]

CHRONOSCOPE, kron'[=o]-sk[=o]p, _n._ an instrument for measuring very short
intervals of time, esp. with projectiles.

CHRYSALIS, kris'a-lis, CHRYSALID, kris'a-lid, _n._ a term originally
applied to the golden-coloured resting stages in the life-history of many
butterflies, but sometimes extended to all forms of pupæ or nymphs: the
shell whence the insect comes:--_pl._ CHRYSAL'IDES (i-d[=e]z).--_adjs._
CHRYS'ALID, CHRYS'ALINE, CHRYS'ALOID. [Gr. _chrysallis_--_chrysos_, gold.]

CHRYSANTHEMUM, kris-an'the-mum, _n._ a genus of composite plants to which
belong the corn marigold and ox-eye daisy. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold,
_anthemon_, flower.]

CHRYSELEPHANTINE, kris-el-e-fan'tin, _adj._ noting the art of making
statues jointly of gold and ivory. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold, _elephantinos_,
made of ivory--_elephas_, _-antos_, ivory.]

CHRYSOBERYL, kris'o-ber-il, _n._ a mineral of various shades of
greenish-yellow or gold colour. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold, and BERYL.]

CHRYSOCOLLA, kris-[=o]-kol'a, _n._ a silicate of protoxide of copper,
bluish-green. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold, _kolla_, glue.]

CHRYSOCRACY, kri-sok'ra-si, _n._ the rule of wealth. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold,
_kratein_, to rule.]

CHRYSOLITE, kris'[=o]-l[=i]t, _n._ a yellow or green precious stone. [Gr.
_chrysos_, and _lithos_, a stone.]

CHRYSOPHAN, kris'[=o]-fan, _n._ an orange-coloured bitter substance found
in rhubarb.--_adj._ CHRYSOPHAN'IC. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold, _phan[=e]s_,
appearing.]

CHRYSOPHILITE, kri-sof'i-l[=i]t, _n._ a lover of gold.

CHRYSOPHYLL, kris'[=o]-fil, _n._ the yellow colouring matter in the green
chlorophyl pigment of plants.--Also _Xanthophyl_. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold,
_phyllon_, a leaf.]

CHRYSOPRASE, kris'o-pr[=a]z, _n._ a variety of chalcedony: (_B._) a
yellowish-green stone, nature unknown. [Gr. _chrysos_, and _prason_, a
leek.]

CHRYSOTYPE, kris'o-t[=i]p, _n._ a process of taking pictures by
photography, on paper impregnated with a neutral solution of chloride of
gold. [Gr. _chrysos_, gold, _typos_, impression.]

CHTHONIAN, th[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ pertaining to the under world,
subterranean.--Also CHTHON'IC. [Gr. _chth[=o]n_, the ground.]

CHUB, chub, _n._ a small fat river-fish.--_adjs._ CHUBBED, CHUB'BY, short
and thick, plump; CHUB'-FACED, plump-faced.--_n._ CHUB'BINESS.

CHUBB, chub, _n._ a patent lock invented by _Chubb_, a locksmith in
London--much used for safes, &c.--Also CHUBB'-LOCK.

CHUCK, chuk, _n._ the call of a hen: a chicken (dim. CHUCK'IE): a word of
endearment.--_v.i._ to call, as a hen. [A variety of CLUCK.]

CHUCK, chuk, _n._ a gentle blow, as under the chin: (_coll._) a toss or
throw; any game of pitch and toss.--_v.t._ to pat gently, as under the
chin: to toss: to pitch.--_n._ CHUCK'-FAR'THING, a game in which a farthing
is chucked into a hole. [Fr. _choquer_, to jolt; allied to SHOCK.]

CHUCK, chuk, _n._ a pebble or small stone: a game with such stones, often
called CHUCK'IES: an instrument for holding an object so that it can be
rotated, as upon the mandrel of a lathe. [Der. uncertain; cf. It. _cioco_,
a block, stump.]

CHUCK-FULL. Same as CHOCK-FULL (q.v. under CHOCK).

CHUCKLE, chuk'l, _n._ a kind of laugh: the cry of a hen.--_v.t._ to call,
as a hen does her chickens: to caress.--_v.i._ to laugh in a quiet,
suppressed manner, indicating derision or enjoyment.--_n._ CHUCK'LING.
[Akin to CHUCK, to call.]

CHUCKLE, chuk'l, _adj._ clumsy.--_n._ CHUCK'LE-HEAD, a loutish fellow.
[Prob. CHOCK, a log.]

CHUFF, chuf, _n._ a clown: a surly fellow.--_n._ CHUF'FINESS,
boorishness.--_adj._ CHUF'FY, coarse and surly. [M. E. _chuffe_, _choffe_,
a boor (origin unknown), conn. with Scotch _coof_, akin to Ice. _kueif_.]

CHUM, chum, _n._ a chamber-fellow: friend or associate, chiefly among
schoolboys and students.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ to occupy, or to put one into,
the same room with another.--_n._ CHUM'MAGE, the quartering of two or more
persons in one room: a fee demanded from a new chum.--_adj._ CHUM'MY,
sociable.--_n._ a chimney-sweeper's boy: a chum. [Perh. a mutilation of
CHAMBER-FELLOW.]

CHUMP, chump, an end lump of wood: a blockhead: the head.--OFF HIS
CHUMP--out of his mind.

CHUNK, chungk, _n._ a thick piece of anything, as wood, bread, &c. [Perh.
related to CHUCK.]

CHURCH, church, _n._ a house set apart for Christian worship: the whole
body of Christians: the clergy: any particular sect or denomination of
Christians: any body professing a common creed, not necessarily
Christian.--_v.t._ to perform with any one the giving of thanks in church,
more esp. of a woman after childbirth, or of a newly-married couple on
first appearing at church after marriage.--_ns._ CHURCH'-ALE, a strong ale
brewed for a church festival: the festival at which the ale was drunk;
CHURCH'-BENCH (_Shak._), a seat in the porch of a church; CHURCH'-COURT, a
court for deciding ecclesiastical causes, a presbytery, synod, or general
assembly; CHURCH'-G[=O]'ING, the act of going to church, esp. habitually;
CHURCH'ING, the first appearance of a woman in church after childbirth;
CHURCH'ISM, adherence to the forms or principles of some church.--_adj._
CHURCH'LESS, not belonging to a church: (_Tennyson_) without church
approval.--_ns._ CHURCH'MAN, a clergyman or ecclesiastic: a member or
upholder of the established church; CHURCH'-RATE, an assessment for the
sustentation of the fabric, &c., of the parish church; CHURCH'-SERV'ICE,
the form of religious service followed in a church, order of public
worship, a book containing such; CHURCH'-TEXT, a thin and tall form of
black-letter print; CHURCHWAR'DEN, an officer who represents the interests
of a parish or church: a long clay-pipe; CHURCH'WAY, the public way or road
that leads to the church; CHURCH'WOMAN, a female member of the Anglican
Church.--_adj._ CHURCH'Y, obtrusively devoted to the church.--_n._
CHURCH'YARD, the burial-ground round a church.--CHURCH HISTORY, the
description of the course of development through which the church as a
whole, as well as its special departments and various institutions, has
passed, from the time of its foundation down to our own day; CHURCH
MILITANT, the church on earth in its struggle against evil; CHURCH
TRIUMPHANT, the portion of the church which has overcome and left this
world.--VISIBLE and INVISIBLE CHURCH (see VISIBLE). [A.S. _circe_ (Scot,
_kirk_; Ger. _kirche_)--Gr. _kyriakon_, belonging to the Lord--_Kyrios_,
the Lord.]

CHURL, churl, _n._ a rustic, labourer: an ill-bred, surly fellow.--_adj._
CHURL'ISH, rude: surly: ill-bred.--_adv._ CHURL'ISHLY.--_n._ CHURL'ISHNESS.
[A.S. _ceorl_, a countryman; Ice. _karl_, Ger. _kerl_, a man; Scot.
_carl_.]

CHURN, churn, _n._ a machine used for the production of butter from cream
or from whole milk.--_v.t._ to agitate cream so as to obtain
butter.--_v.i._ to perform the act of churning.--_ns._ CHURN'-DRILL, a
drill worked by hand, not struck with the hammer, a jumper; CHURN'ING, the
act of making butter: the quantity of butter made at once; CHURN'-STAFF,
the plunger used in an upright churn: the sun-spurge. [A.S. _cyrin_; Ice.
_kirna_, a churn; Dut. and Ger. _kernen_, to churn.]

CHURR, ch[.e]r, _n._ a low sound made by certain birds.--_v.i._ to make
this sound. [Prob. imit.]

CHURRUS, chur'us, _n._ the resinous exudation of _Cannabis indica_, which,
in its milder preparations, known as _bhang_, &c., is used as a narcotic
and intoxicant. [Hind. _charas_.]

CHUSE, ch[=oo]z, _v.t._ a form of CHOOSE.

CHUT, chut, _interj._ an expression of impatience.

CHUTE, sh[=oo]t, _n._ a waterfall, rapid: a channel down which to pass
water, logs, rubbish, &c. [Fr. _chute_, a fall.]

CHUTNEE, CHUTNY, chut'ne, _n._ an East Indian condiment, a compound of
mangoes, chillies, or capsicum, and lime-juice, &c. [Hind. _chatni_.]

CHYLE, k[=i]l, _n._ a white fluid drawn from the food while in the
intestines.--_adjs._ CHYL[=A]'CEOUS, CHYLIF'IC, CHYL'OUS; CHYLIFAC'TIVE,
having the power to make chyle.--_n._ CHYLIFIC[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ and _v.i._
CHYL'IFY, to convert, or be converted, into chyle.--_n._ CHYL[=U]'RIA, a
discharge of milky urine. [Fr.,--Gr. _chylos_, juice--_cheein_, to pour.]

CHYME, k[=i]m, _n._ the pulp to which the food is reduced in the
stomach.--_n._ CHYMIFIC[=A]'TION, the act of being formed into
chyme.--_v.t._ CHYM'IFY, to form into chyme.--_adj._ CHYM'OUS. [Gr.
_chymos_, from _cheein_.]

CHYMICAL, CHYMISTRY, obsolete forms of CHEMICAL, CHEMISTRY.

CHYND, ch[=i]nd, _p.adj._ (_Spens._) cut into chines.

CIBOL, sib'ol, _n._ a variety of onion. [Fr. _ciboule_ (Sp. _cebolla_)--Low
L. _cepola_, dim. of L. _cepa_, an onion.]

CIBORIUM, si-b[=o]'ri-um, _n._ (_R.C. Church_) a vessel nearly resembling a
chalice, with an arched cover, in which the Host is deposited: a canopy
supported on four pillars over the high altar:--_pl._ CIB[=O]'RIA. [L., a
drinking-cup--Gr. _kib[=o]rion_, the seed-vessel of the Egyptian bean.]

CICADA, si-k[=a]'da, CICALA, si-k[=a]'la, _n._ an insect remarkable for its
chirping sound. [L. _cicada_.]

CICATRIX, sik-[=a]'triks, or sik'a-triks, _n._ the scar over a wound after
it is healed--also CIC'ATRICE: scar in the bark of a tree: (_Shak._) mark,
impression.--_ns._ CICATRIC'ULA, the germinating point in the yolk of an
egg; CICATRIS[=A]'TION, the process of healing over.--_v.t._ CIC'ATRISE, to
help the formation of a cicatrix on a wound or ulcer: to scar.--_v.i._ to
heal. [Fr.,--L. _cicatrix_, a scar.]

CICELY, sis'e-li, _n._ a genus of umbelliferous plants nearly allied to
chervil. [L. and Gr. _seseli_.]

CICERONE, chich-er-[=o]'ni, or sis-e-r[=o]'ne, _n._ one who shows strangers
the curiosities of a place: a guide.--_v.i._ to act as cicerone.--_adjs._
CICER[=O]'NIAN, CICERON'IC.--_ns._ CICER[=O]'NIANISM, the character of
Cicero's Latin style; CICERON'ISM, CICERON'AGE, CICERONE'SHIP, the function
of a guide. [It.,--L. _Cicero_, the Roman orator.]

CICISBEO, ch[=e]-ch[=e]s-b[=a]'o, _n._ a married woman's gallant or
_cavaliere servente_ in Italy:--_pl._ CICISBE'I.--_n._ CICISB[=E]'ISM.
[It.]

CICLATOUN. See CHECKLATON.

CICUTA, si-k[=u]'ta, _n._ a genus of umbelliferous plants with poisonous
roots--_water-hemlock_ or _cowbane_. [L., hemlock.]

CID, sid, _n._ a chief, captain, a hero, from the famous 11th-cent.
Castilian warrior against the Moors, styled _el Cid Campeador_, whose real
name was Rodrigo, or Ruy, Diaz (i.e. 'son of Diego'). The name _Cid_ is the
Ar. _seid_, _seiyid_, lord.

CIDER, s[=i]'d[.e]r, _n._ a drink made from apples.--_ns._ C[=I]'DER-AND, a
mixture of cider and other spirits; C[=I]'DER-CUP, a drink of sweetened
cider, with other ingredients; C[=I]'DERKIN, an inferior cider. [Fr.
_cidre_--L.,--Gr. _sikera_, strong drink--Heb. _shakar_, to be
intoxicated.]

CI-DEVANT, s[=e]-de-vong', _adj._ former. [Fr.]

CIEL. See CEIL.

CIERGE. See CERGE.

CIGAR, si-gär', _n._ a roll of tobacco-leaves for smoking.--_n._
CIGARETTE', a little cigar made of finely-cut tobacco rolled in thin paper.
[Sp. _cigarro_.]

CILIA, sil'i-a, _n.pl._ hair-like lashes borne by cells.--_adjs._ CIL'IARY,
CIL'I[=A]TE, CIL'I[=A]TED, CILIF'EROUS, having cilia; CIL'I[=I]FORM, very
thin and slender like cilia. [L. _cilium_, pl. _cilia_, eyelids,
eyelashes.]

CILICE, sil'is, _n._ hair-cloth: a penitential garment made of
hair-cloth.--_adj._ CILIC'IOUS. [L.,--Gr. _kilikion_, a cloth made of
Cilician goat's hair.]

CIMAR. Same as SIMAR.

CIMBRIC, sim'brik, _adj._ pertaining to the ancient _Cimbri_, a people from
central and northern Europe, crushed by Marius, 101 B.C.--Also CIM'BRIAN.
[Sometimes made Celtic by a desperate analogy with the name _Cymry_.]

CIMEX, si-meks', _n._ a bug.--_adjs._ CIMIC'IC, CIMIC'IOUS.--_n._
CIMICIF'UGA, the genus of bugworts or bugbanes, natural order
_Ranunculaceæ_. [L. _cimex_.]

CIMIER, s[=e]-my[=a]', _n._ the crest of a helmet. [Fr.]

CIMMERIAN, sim-[=e]'ri-an, _adj._ relating to the _Cimmerii_, a tribe
fabled to have lived in perpetual darkness: extremely dark.

CIMOLITE, sim'[=o]-l[=i]t, _n._ a species of clay, or hydrous silicate of
aluminium, used as fuller's earth. [Gr. _kim[=o]lia_, prob. from
_Kim[=o]los_, an island of the Cyclades.]

CINCH, sinch, _n._ a saddle-girth.--_v.i._ to tighten the cinch. [Sp.
_cincha_--L. _cingula_.]

CINCHONA, sin-k[=o]'na, _n._ a genus of trees, yielding the bark so much
valued in medicine, from which the most important alkaloids, quinine and
its congeners, are obtained--also called _Peruvian bark_.--_adjs._
CINCHON[=A]'CEOUS, CINCHON'IC.--_n._ CIN'CHONINE, an alkaloid obtained from
the bark of several species of cinchona.--_adj._ CINCHONIN'IC.--_n._
CINCHONIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ CIN'CHONISE, to bring under the influence of
cinchona or quinine.--_n._ CIN'CHONISM, a morbid state due to overdoses of
cinchona or quinine. [Said to be so named from the Countess of _Chinchon_,
who was cured of a fever by it in 1638.]

CINCTURE, singk't[=u]r, _n._ a girdle or belt: a moulding round a
column.--_v.t._ to gird, encompass.--_adjs._ CINCT, surrounded; CINC'TURED,
having a cincture. [L. _cinctura_--_cing[)e]re_, _cinctum_, to gird.]

CINDER, sin'd[.e]r, _n._ the refuse of burned coals: anything charred by
fire: (_slang_) some strong stimulant put in tea, soda-water, &c.--_ns._
CINDEREL'LA, a scullery-maid; CINDEREL'LA-DANCE, an early dancing-party
ending at midnight--from the nursery tale.--_adj._ CIN'DERY. [A.S.
_sinder_, scoriæ, slag.]

CINEMATOGRAPH. See KINEMATOGRAPH.

CINENCHYMA, si-neng'ki-ma, _n._ laticiferous tissue, consisting of
irregularly branching and anastomosing vessels.--_adj._ CINENCHYM'ATOUS.
[Gr. _kinein_, to move, _engchyma_, infusion.]

CINERARIA, sin-e-r[=a]'ri-a, _n._ a genus of plants, with flowers of
various colours, chiefly belonging to South Africa, but also grown in
greenhouses in Britain and elsewhere. [L. _cinerarius_--_cinis_, _cineris_,
ashes.]

CINERARY, sin'e-ra-ri, _adj._ pertaining to ashes.--_ns._ CINER[=A]'TION;
CINER[=A]T'OR; CIN[=E]'REA, gray or cellular, as distinguished from white
or fibrous, nerve tissue.--_adjs._ CIN[=E]'REAL; CIN[=E]'REOUS, ashy-gray;
CINERES'CENT, becoming ashy-gray; CINERI'TIOUS, ashy-gray: pertaining to
gray nerve tissue. [L. _cinereus_, ashy--_cinis_, _cineris_, ashes.]

CINGALESE, sing'ga-l[=e]z, _n._ a native of Ceylon.--_adj._ belonging to
Ceylon.

CINGULUM, sing'g[=u]-lum, _n._ the girdle of an alb. [L.--_cing[)e]re_, to
gird.]

CINNABAR, sin'a-bar, _n._ sulphuret of mercury, called vermilion when used
as a pigment.--_adj._ vermilion-coloured.--_adjs._ CINNABAR'IC,
CINN'ABARINE. [L.,--Gr. _kinnabari_, a dye, from Persian.]

CINNAMON, sin'a-mon, _n._ the spicy bark of a laurel in Ceylon: the
tree.--_adj._ cinnamon-coloured.--_adjs._ CINNAM'IC, CINNAMON'IC, obtained
from, or consisting of, cinnamon.--_n._ CINN'AMON-STONE, a kind of stone
found in Ceylon, of a cinnamon or reddish-brown colour, sometimes cut for
jewellery. [L. _cinnamomum_--Heb. _kinnamon_.]

[Illustration]

CINQUE, singk, _n._ the number five as on dice.--_ns._ CINQUE'-CEN'TO (It.,
'five hundred'), a phrase sometimes applied, in treating of architecture
and art, to the Renaissance period, which began about 1500; CINQUE'-FOIL
(_her._), a common bearing representing a flower with five petals borne
full-faced and without a stalk: (_bot._) species of plants of the genus
_Potentilla_: the five-bladed clover; CINQUE'-PACE (_Shak._), a kind of
dance, the pace or movement of which is characterised by five
beats.--_n.pl._ CINQUE'-PORTS, the five ancient ports on the south of
England lying opposite to France--Sandwich, Dover, Hythe, Romney, and
Hastings.--_adj._ CINQUE'-SPOT'TED (_Shak._), having five spots. [Fr.]

CIPHER, s[=i]'f[.e]r, _n._ (_arith._) the character 0: any of the nine
figures: anything of little value, whether persons or things: a nonentity:
an interweaving of the initials of a name: a secret kind of
writing.--_v.i._ to work at arithmetic: to write in cipher: of an
organ-pipe, to sound independent of the organ: (_Shak._) to
decipher.--_ns._ C[=I]'PHERING; C[=I]'PHER-KEY, a key to a cipher or piece
of secret writing. [O. Fr. _cifre_, Fr. _chiffre_--Ar. _sifr_, empty.]

CIPOLIN, sip'[=o]-lin, _n._ a granular limestone containing mica.--Also
CIPOLLINO (ch[=e]-pol-l[=e]'n[=o]). [It.,--_cipolla_, an onion.]

CIPPUS, sip'us, _n._ the stocks: a monumental pillar. [L. _cippus_, a
post.]

CIRCA, sir'ka, _prep._ and _adv._ about, around. [L.]

CIRCASSIAN, s[.e]r-kash'yan, _adj._ belonging to _Circassia_, a district of
Russia, on the north of Mount Caucasus: a kind of light cashmere of silk
and mohair--generally CIRCASSIENNE' (Fr. _fem._).

CIRCEAN, s[.e]r-s[=e]'an, _adj._ relating to the beautiful sorceress
_Circe_, who transformed the companions of Ulysses into swine by a magic
beverage: infatuating and degrading.--Also CIRCÆ'AN.

CIRCENSIAN, sir-sen'shi-an, _adj._ relating to the CIRCUS Maximus in Rome,
where the games and contests were held.--Also CIRCEN'SIAL (_obs._). [L.
_circensis_--_circus_.]

CIRCLE, s[.e]r'kl, _n._ a plane figure bounded by one line every point of
which is equally distant from a certain point called the centre: the line
which bounds the figure: a ring: a planet's orbit: a series ending where it
began: a figure in magic; a company surrounding the principal person: those
of a certain class or society.--_v.t._ to move round: to encompass.--_v.i._
to move in a circle: to stand in a circle.--_adjs._ CIR'CINATE; CIR'CLED,
circular: encircled.--_ns._ CIR'CLER; CIR'CLET; CIR'CLING, motion in a
circle: a revolution.--DRESS' CIR'CLE (see DRESS); FAIR'Y-CIR'CLE, -RING
(see FAIRY).--REASONING IN A CIRCLE, assuming what is to be proved as the
basis of the argument. [A.S. _circul_--L. _circulus_, dim. of _circus_;
allied to A.S. _hring_, a ring.]

CIRCUIT, s[.e]r'kit, _n._ the act of moving round: area, extent: a round
made in the exercise of a calling, esp. the round made by the judges for
holding the courts of law: the judges making the round: (_Shak._)
diadem.--_v.t._ to go round.--_n._ CIRCUITEER', a judge: one who goes on a
circuit.--_adj._ CIRC[=U]'ITOUS, round about.--_adv._
CIRC[=U]'ITOUSLY.--_n._ CIRC[=U]'ITY, motion in a circle: an indirect
course.--MAKE A CIRCUIT, to go round. [Fr.,--L. _circuitus_--_circu[=i]re_,
_circum_, round, _[=i]re_, to go.]

CIRCULAR, s[.e]r'k[=u]-lar, _adj._ round: ending in itself: addressed to a
circle of persons.--_n._ a note sent round to a circle or number of
persons.--_n._ CIRCULAR'ITY.--_adv._ CIR'CULARLY.--CIRCULAR NOTES,
bank-notes issued for the convenience of travellers, being a kind of bill
personal to the bearer, who is given also a corresponding 'letter of
indication' addressed to foreign bankers.

CIRCULATE, s[.e]r'k[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to make to go round as in a circle:
to spread: to repeat (of decimals).--_v.i._ to move round: to be spread
about.--_adj._ CIR'CULABLE, capable of being circulated.--_ns._ CIR'CULANT;
CIRCUL[=A]'TION, the act of moving in a circle: the movement of the blood:
the sale of a periodical: the publication of a report or of a book: the
money in use at any time in a country.--_adjs._ CIR'CULATIVE, CIR'CULATORY,
circulating.--_n._ CIR'CULATOR.--CIRCULATING LIBRARY, one where books are
circulated among subscribers. [L. _circul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_.]

CIRCUMAMBAGES, s[.e]r-kum-am'baj-ez, _n.pl._ roundabout ways of
speech.--_adj._ CIRCUMAMB[=A]'GIOUS, roundabout in speech.--_ns._
CIRCUMAM'BIENCE, CIRCUMAM'BIENCY.--_adj._ CIRCUMAM'BIENT, going round
about.--_n._ CIRCUMBEN'DIBUS, a roundabout method or course: a
circumlocution. [L. _circum_, about, _amb[=i]re_, to go round.]

CIRCUMAMBULATE, s[.e]r-kum-am'b[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.i._ to walk round
about.--_n._ CIRCUMAMBUL[=A]'TION. [L. _ambul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to walk.]

CIRCUMCISE, s[.e]r'kum-s[=i]z, _v.t._ to cut off the foreskin according to
the Jewish law: (_fig._) to purify.--_p.adj._ CIR'CUMCISED, that has
undergone circumcision: purified, chastened.--_ns._ CIR'CUMCISER, one who
circumcises; CIRCUMCI'SION, the act of circumcising. [L. _circumcid[)e]re_,
_circumcisum_--_cæd[)e]re_, to cut.]

CIRCUMDENUDATION, s[.e]r-kum-de-n[=u]d-[=a]'shun, _n._ (_geol._) denudation
or erosion round an elevated tract left isolated.

CIRCUMDUCT, s[.e]r'kum-dukt, _v.t._ to lead around or about, to revolve
round an imaginary axis so as to describe a cone: (_Scots law_) to close a
case to further proof.--_n._ CIRCUMDUC'TION.--_adj._ CIRCUMDUCT'ORY. [L.
_circum_, about, _duc[)e]re_, _ductum_, to lead.]

CIRCUMFERENCE, s[.e]r-kum'f[.e]r-ens, _n._ the boundary-line of any round
body, esp. of a circle: the line surrounding anything: area: compass:
distance round.--_adj._ CIRCUMFEREN'TIAL--_n._ CIRCUMFERENT'OR, an
instrument used by surveyors and miners for measuring horizontal angles,
consisting of a graduated circle, an index, and a magnetic needle suspended
over the centre of a circle--now superseded by the _Theodolite_. [L.
_circum_, about, _ferre_, to carry.]

CIRCUMFLECT, s[.e]r'kum-flekt, _v.t._ to mark with a circumflex.--_ns._
CIR'CUMFLEX, an accent (^) denoting a rising and falling of the voice on a
vowel or syllable; CIRCUMFLEX'ION, a bending round. [L. _flect[)e]re_,
_flexum_, to bend.]

CIRCUMFLUENCE, s[.e]r-kum'fl[=oo]-ens, _n._ a flowing round.--_adj._
CIRCUM'FLUENT, flowing round. [L. _flu[)e]re_, to flow.]

CIRCUMFORANEOUS, s[.e]r-kum-f[=o]-r[=a]'ne-us, _adj._ wandering about as
from market to market, vagrant.--Also CIRCUMFORA'NEAN. [L., _circum_,
about, _forum_, the forum, market-place.]

CIRCUMFUSE, s[.e]r-kum-f[=u]z', _v.t._ to pour around.--_p.adj._
CIRCUMFUSED'.--_adj._ CIRCUMFUS'ILE, molten.--_n._ CIRCUMF[=U]'SION. [L.
_fund[)e]re_, _fusum_, to pour.]

CIRCUMGYRATE, s[.e]r-kum-j[=i]'r[=a]t, _v.i._ to go round and round.--_n._
CIRCUMGYR[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CIRCUMGY'RATORY. [L. _gyr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_,
to turn.]

CIRCUMJACENT, s[.e]r-kum-j[=a]'sent, _adj._ lying round: bordering on every
side.--_n._ CIRCUMJA'CENCY. [L. _jacens_, lying--_jac[=e]re_, to lie.]

CIRCUMLITTORAL, s[.e]r-kum-lit'[=o]-ral, _adj._ adjacent to the shore-line.
[L. _circum_, about, _litus_, _litoris_, the shore.]

CIRCUMLOCUTION, s[.e]r-kum-l[=o]-k[=u]'shun, _n._ roundabout speaking: a
manner of expression in which many unnecessary words are used.--_v.i._
CIR'CUMLOCUTE, to use circumlocution.--_n._ CIRCUMLOC[=U]'TIONIST, one who
practises circumlocution.--_adj._ CIRCUMLOC'UTORY.--CIRCUMLOCUTION OFFICE,
a name given by Dickens in _Little Dorrit_ to the government offices, owing
to their dilatoriness in attending to business. [L. _loqui_, _locutus_, to
speak.]

CIRCUMMURE, s[.e]r-kum-m[=u]r', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to wall round. [L.
_murus_, a wall.]

CIRCUMNAVIGATE, s[.e]r-kum-nav'i-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to sail round.--_adj._
CIRCUMNAV'IGABLE, capable of being circumnavigated.--_ns._
CIRCUMNAVIG[=A]'TION; CIRCUMNAV'IGATOR, one who sails round. [See
NAVIGATE.]

CIRCUMNUTATION, s[.e]r-kum-n[=u]-t[=a]'shun, _n._ a nodding or turning
successively towards all points of the compass, as in the tendrils of
plants.--_v.i._ CIRCUMN[=U]'TATE.--_adj._ CIRCUMN[=U]'TATORY. [L. _circum_,
about, _nut[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to nod.]

CIRCUMPOLAR, s[.e]r-kum-p[=o]'lar, _adj._ situated round the pole. [See
POLAR.]

CIRCUMPOSE, s[.e]r'kum-p[=o]z, _v.t._ to place round.--_n._
CIRCUMPOSI'TION, the act of placing round. [See POSITION.]

CIRCUMSCRIBE, s[.e]r-kum-skr[=i]b', _v.t._ to draw a line round: to enclose
within certain limits, to curtail, abridge.--_adj._ CIRCUMSCRIB'ABLE, able
to be circumscribed.--_ns._ CIRCUMSCRIB'ER, one who circumscribes;
CIRCUMSCRIP'TION, limitation: the line that limits: a circumscribed
place.--_adj._ CIRCUMSCRIP'TIVE, marking the external form or outline. [L.
_scrib[)e]re_, to write.]

CIRCUMSPECT, s[.e]r'kum-spekt, _adj._ looking round on all sides
watchfully: cautious: prudent.--_n._ CIRCUMSPEC'TION, watchfulness:
caution: examining.--_adj._ CIRCUMSPEC'TIVE, looking around: wary.--_adv._
CIR'CUMSPECTLY.--_n._ CIR'CUMSPECTNESS. [L. _spec[)e]re_, _spectum_, to
look.]

CIRCUMSTANCE, s[.e]r'kum-stans, _n._ the logical surroundings of an action:
an accident or event: ceremony: detail: (_pl._) the state of one's
affairs.--_v.t._ to place in particular circumstances:--_pa.p._
CIR'CUMSTANCED.--_adj._ CIRCUMSTAN'TIAL, consisting of details:
minute.--_n._ CIRCUMSTANTIAL'ITY, the quality of being circumstantial:
minuteness in details: a detail.--_adv._ CIRCUMSTAN'TIALLY.--_n.pl._
CIRCUMSTAN'TIALS, incidentals: details.--_v.t._ CIRCUMSTAN'TIATE, to prove
by circumstances: to describe exactly.--CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE, evidence
which is not positive nor direct, but which is gathered inferentially from
the circumstances in the case.--IN GOOD or BAD CIRCUMSTANCES, prosperous or
unprosperous; IN, UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES, owing to certain conditions. [L.
_stans_, _stantis_, standing--_st[=a]re_, to stand.]

CIRCUMVALLATE, s[.e]r-kum'val-[=a]t, _v.t._ to surround with a
rampart.--_n._ CIRCUMVALL[=A]'TION, a surrounding with a wall: a wall or
fortification surrounding a town or fort. [L. _vallum_, rampart.]

CIRCUMVENT, s[.e]r-kum-vent', _v.t._ to come round or outwit a person: to
deceive or cheat.--_n._ CIRCUMVEN'TION.--_adj._ CIRCUMVENT'IVE, deceiving
by artifices. [L. _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

CIRCUMVOLVE, s[.e]r-kum-volv', _v.t._ to roll round.--_v.i._ to
revolve:--_pr.p._ circumvolv'ing; _pa.p._ circumvolved'.--_n._
CIRCUMVOL[=U]'TION, a turning or rolling round: anything winding or
sinuous. [L. _volv[)e]re_, _volutum_, to roll.]

CIRCUS, s[.e]r'kus, _n._ a circular building for the exhibition of games: a
place for the exhibition of feats of horsemanship: a group of houses
arranged in the form of a circle: applied to nature, as, e.g., high hills
surrounding a plain.--_n._ CIRQUE (s[.e]rk), a circus: a ring of some sort.
[L. _circus_; cog. with Gr. _kirkos_.]

CIRRHOPOD, CIRRHOPODA, older forms of CIRRIPED, CIRRIPEDA.

CIRRIPEDA, sir-rip'e-da, CIRRIPEDIA, sir-rip-[=e]'di-a, _n._ a degenerate
sub-class of Crustacea, including the numerous forms of _Barnacles_ and
_Acorn-shells_.--_n._ CIR'RIPED, one of the Cirripeda. [L. _cirrus_, a tuft
of hair, and _pes_, a foot.]

CIRRUS, sir'us, _n._ the highest form of clouds consisting of curling
fibres: (_bot._) a tendril: (_zool._) any curled filament:--_pl._ CIRRI
(sir'[=i]).--_adjs._ CIRR'ATE, CIRR'IFORM, like a cirrus; CIRR'IGRADE,
moving by cirri.--_n._ CIRR'O-C[=U]'MULUS, a fleecy cloud intermediate
between the cirrus and cumulus.--_adj._ CIRR'OSE, with tendrils.--_n._
CIRR'O-STR[=A]'TUS, a mottled-looking cloud intermediate between the cirrus
and stratus.--_adj._ CIRR'OUS, having a cirrus. [L.]

CISALPINE, sis-alp'in, _adj._ on this side--i.e. on the Roman side--of the
Alps.--So CISATLAN'TIC; CISLEITH'AN, on this side the Leitha, which
separates the archduchy of Austria and Hungary; CISMON'TANE, on this side
the mountains--opp. to _Ultramontane_; CIS'PADANE, on this side the Po;
CISPON'TINE, on this side of the bridges, viz. in London, north of the
Thames. [L. _cis_, on this side.]

CISELURE, s[=e]z'l[=u]r, _n._ the art or operation of chasing, the chasing
upon a piece of metal-work.--_n._ CIS'ELEUR, a chaser. [Fr.]

CISSOID, sis'soid, _n._ a plane curve consisting of two infinite branches
symmetrically placed with reference to the diameter of a circle, so that at
one of its extremities they form a Cusp (q.v.), while the tangent to the
circle at the other extremity is their common asymptote. [Gr.
_kissoeid[=e]s_.]

CIST, sist, _n._ a tomb consisting of a stone chest covered with stone
slabs.--_adjs._ CIST'ED, containing cists; CIST'IC, like a cist. [See
CHEST.]

CISTELLA, sis-tel'a, _n._ the capsular shield of some lichens. [L., dim. of
_cista_, a box.]

CISTERCIAN, sis-ter'shan, _n._ one of the order of monks established in
1098 in the forest of Citeaux (_Cistercium_), in France--an offshoot of the
Benedictines.

CISTERN, sis't[.e]rn, _n._ any receptacle for holding water or other
liquid: a reservoir: in a steam-engine, the vessel surrounding the
condenser. [L. _cisterna_, from _cista_, a chest.]

CISTUS, sis'tus, _n._ Rock-rose, a genus of exogenous shrubby plants,
cultivated for the beauty of their flowers:--_pl._ CIS'TUSES (-[=e]z) and
CIS'TI ('t[=i]). [Low L., from Gr. _kistos_, the rock-rose.]

CISTVAEN. See KISTVAEN.

CIT, sit, _n._ shortened from citizen, and used as a term of
contempt:--_fem._ CIT'ESS (_Dryden_). [See CITIZEN.]

CITADEL, sit'a-del, _n._ a fortress in or near a city: the place where the
guns are kept in an ironclad man-of-war. [It. _cittadella_, dim. of
_città_, a city. See CITY.]

CITE, s[=i]t, _v.t._ to call or summon: to summon to answer in court: to
quote: to name: to adduce as proof.--_adj._ CIT'ABLE, that can be
cited.--_ns._ CIT'AL, summons to appear: (_Shak._) accusation, reproof;
CIT[=A]'TION, an official summons to appear: the document containing the
summons: the act of quoting: the passage or name quoted; CIT[=A]'TOR, one
who cites.--_adj._ CIT'[=A]TORY, having to do with citation, addicted to
citation. [L. _cit[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to call, inten. of _ci[=e]re_,
_c[=i]re_, to make to go.]

CITHARA, sith'a-ra, _n._ an ancient musical instrument closely resembling
the guitar.--_n._ CITH'ARIST, a player on it.--_adj._ CITHARIST'IC.--_ns._
CITH'ER, CITH'ERN, CIT'TERN, a metal-stringed musical instrument, played
with a plectrum. [L.,--Gr. _kithara_. A doublet of GUITAR.]

CITIGRADE, sit'i-gr[=a]d, _adj._ moving quickly: applied to a tribe of
spiders of remarkably quick motions. [L. _citus_, quick, _gradus_, a step.]

CITIZEN, sit'i-zen, _n._ an inhabitant of a city: a member of a state: a
townsman: a freeman:--_fem._ CIT'IZENESS.--_adj._ (_Shak._) like a
citizen.--_v.t._ CIT'IZENISE, to make a citizen of.--_ns._ CIT'IZENRY, the
general body of citizens; CIT'IZENSHIP, the rights of a citizen. [M. E.
_citesein_--O. Fr. _citeain_. See CITY.]

CITOLE, sit'[=o]l, _n._ a small dulcimer used in medieval times. [O.
Fr.,--L. _cithara_.]

CITRON, sit'run, _n._ the fruit of the citron-tree, resembling a
lemon.--_n._ CIT'RATE, a salt of citric acid.--_adjs._ CIT'REOUS, citrine;
CIT'RIC, derived from the citron; CIT'RINE, dark and greenish yellow, like
a citron or lemon.--_n._ citrine colour: a rock crystal of this
colour.--_ns._ CIT'RON-WOOD, CIT'RUS-WOOD, the most costly furniture-wood
of the ancient Romans.--CITRIC ACID, the acid to which lemon and lime juice
owe their sourness. [Fr.,--L. _citrus_--Gr. _kitron_, a citron.]

CITTERN. Same as CITHER (q.v. under CITHARA).

CITY, sit'i, _n._ a large town: a town with a corporation.--_n.pl._
CIT'Y-COMMIS'SIONERS, officials who attend to the drainage, &c.--_n._
CIT'Y-MIS'SION, a mission for evangelising the poor classes in the large
cities.--_adj._ CIV'IC, pertaining to a city or citizen.--CITY OF GOD,
HEAVENLY CITY, &c., the ideal of the Church of Christ in glory; CITY OF
REFUGE, by the Jewish law a city where the perpetrator of an accidental
murder might flee for refuge.--ETERNAL CITY, Rome; HOLY CITY,
Jerusalem.--THE CITY, THE CITY OF LONDON, that part of London where
business is principally carried on. [Fr. _cité_, a city--L. _civitas_, the
state--_civis_, a citizen.]

CIVE, s[=i]v, _n._ See CHIVE.

CIVET, siv'et, _n._ a perfume obtained from the civet or CIV'ET-CAT, a
small carnivorous animal of Africa, India, &c. [Fr. _civette_--Ar.
_zabad_.]

CIVIC. See CITY.

CIVIL, siv'il, _adj._ pertaining to the community: having the refinement of
city-bred people: polite: commercial, not military: lay, secular, or
temporal, not ecclesiastical: pertaining to the individual citizen: (_law_)
relating to private relations amongst citizens, and such suits as arise out
of these, as opposed to _criminal_: (_theol._) naturally good, as opposed
to good through regeneration.--_ns._ CIVIL'IAN, a professor or student of
civil law (not canon law): one engaged in civil as distinguished from
military and other pursuits; CIV'ILIST, one versed in civil law; CIVIL'ITY,
good-breeding: politeness.--_adv._ CIV'ILLY.--_adj._ CIV'IL-SUIT'ED
(_Milton_), sombrely clad.--_n._ CIV'ISM, good citizenship, state of being
well-affected to the government.--CIVIL DEATH, the loss of all civil and
legal but not natural privileges, as by outlawry: CIVIL ENGINEER, one who
plans rail-ways, docks, &c., as opposed to a military engineer, or to a
mechanical engineer, who makes machines, &c.; CIVIL LAW, as opposed to
criminal law: the law laid down by a state regarding the rights of the
inhabitants; CIVIL LIST, now the expenses of the sovereign's household
only; CIVIL LIST PENSIONS, those granted by royal favour; CIVIL SERVICE,
the paid service of the state, in so far as it is not military or naval;
CIVIL WAR, a war between citizens of the same state. [L.
_civ[=i]lis_--_civis_.]

CIVILISE, siv'il-[=i]z, _v.t._ to reclaim from barbarism: to instruct in
arts and refinements.--_adj._ CIV'ILISABLE.--_n._ CIVILIS[=A]'TION, state
of being civilised--_p.adj._ CIV'ILISED.--_n._ CIV'ILISER.

CLABBER, klab'[.e]r, _n._ (_Scot._). [Gael. _clabar_, mud.]

CLACHAN, kla'han, _n._ (_Scot._) a small village. [Gael.
_clachan_--_clach_, stone.]

[Illustration]

CLACK, klak, _v.i._ to make a sudden sharp noise as by striking: to
chatter: to cackle.--_n._ a sharp, sudden sound; sound of voices: an
instrument making this kind of noise: (_coll._) the tongue.--_ns._
CLACK'-BOX, the box containing the clack-valve of an engine; CLACK'-DISH
(_Shak._), a wooden dish carried by beggars, having a movable cover which
they clacked to attract attention; CLACK'ER; CLACK'-VALVE, a valve used in
pumps, having a flap or a hinge which lifts up to let the fluid pass, but
prevents the fluid from returning by falling back over the aperture. [From
the sound.]

CLAD, klad, _pa.t_. and _pa.p._ of CLOTHE.

CLAES, kl[=a]z, _n.pl._ Scotch for CLOTHES.

CLAG, klag, _v.i._ (_prov._) to stick.--_adj._ CLAG'GY, sticky. [Prob.
Scand.; Dan. _klag_, mud.]

CLAIM, kl[=a]m, _v.t._ to call for: to demand as a right.--_n._ a demand
for something supposed due: right or ground for demanding: the thing
claimed.--_adj._ CLAIM'ABLE, that can be claimed.--_n._ CLAIM'ANT, one who
makes a claim.--LAY CLAIM TO, to assert a right. [O. Fr. _claimer_--L.
_clam[=a]re_, to call out.]

CLAIRAUDIENCE, kl[=a]r-awd'i-ens, _n._ the alleged power of hearing things
not present to the senses.--_n._ CLAIRAUD'IENT. [Fr. _clair_--L. _clarus_,
clear, and AUDIENCE.]

CLAIR-OBSCURE, CLARE-OBSCURE, kl[=a]r-ob-sk[=u]r'. Same as CHIAROSCURO
(q.v.). [Fr. _clair_--L. _clarus_, clear, and Fr. _obscur_--L. _obscurus_,
obscure.]

CLAIRSCHACH, kl[=a]r'shäh, _n._ the old Celtic harp strung with wire.

CLAIRVOYANCE, kl[=a]r-voi'ans, _n._ the alleged power of seeing things not
present to the senses.--_n._ CLAIRVOY'ANT, one who is said to have this
power. [Fr., _clair_--L. _clarus_, clear, and Fr. _voir_--L. _vid[=e]re_,
to see.]

CLAM, klam, _n._ a species of bivalve shellfish: an instrument for holding.
[A.S. _clam_, fetter; cf. Ger. _klamm_; Dan. _klamme_.]

CLAM, klam, _v.t._ to clog: to smear; _pr.p._ clam'ming; _pa.p._
clammed.--_n._ dampness.--_adv._ CLAM'MILY.--_n._ CLAM'MINESS.--_adj._
CLAM'MY, sticky: moist and adhesive. [A.S. _clæman_, to anoint; cf. Dut.,
Dan. _klam_, damp.]

CLAM, klam, _n._ noise produced in ringing a chime of bells at
once.--_v.t._ or _v.i._ to produce a clam. [Prob. onomatopoeic.]

CLAMANT, klam'ant, _adj._ calling aloud or earnestly.--_n._ CLAM'ANCY,
urgency. [L. _clam[=a]re_, to cry out.]

CLAMBER, klam'b[.e]r, _v.i._ to climb with difficulty, grasping with the
hands and feet.--_n._ the act of clambering. [From root of CLUMP; cf. Ger.
_klammern_--_klemmen_, to squeeze or hold tightly.]

CLAMJAMPHRIE, klam-jam'fri, _n._ (_Scot._) rubbish: nonsense: rabble. [Der.
uncertain.]

CLAMOUR, klam'or, _n._ a loud continuous outcry: uproar; any loud
noise.--_v.i._ to cry aloud in demand: to make a loud continuous
outcry.--_adj._ CLAM'OROUS, noisy, boisterous.--_adv._ CLAM'OROUSLY.--_ns._
CLAM'-OROUSNESS; CLAM'OURER. [L. _clamor_.]

CLAMP, klamp, _n._ a piece of timber, iron, &c., used to fasten things
together or to strengthen any framework: any instrument for
holding.--_v.t._ to bind with clamps. [From a root seen in A.S. _clam_,
fetter; Dut. _klamp_, a clamp, and akin to Eng. CLIP, CLIMB.]

CLAMP, klamp, _n._ a heavy tread.--_v.i._ to tread heavily. [Prob. from the
sound.]

CLAMPER, klam'p[.e]r, _v.t._ to botch up. [Der. unknown; prob. conn. with
CLAMP, a piece of timber, &c.]

CLAN, klan, _n._ a tribe or collection of families subject to a single
chieftain, bearing the same surname, and supposed to have a common
ancestor: a clique, sect: a collective name for a number of persons or
things.--_adj._ CLAN'NISH, closely united, like the members of a
clan.--_adv._ CLAN'NISHLY.--_ns._ CLAN'NISHNESS; CLAN'SHIP, association of
families under a chieftain: feeling of loyalty to a clan; CLANS'MAN, a
member of a clan. [Gael. _clann_, offspring, tribe--L. _planta_, a shoot.]

CLANDESTINE, klan-des'tin, _adj._ concealed or hidden: private:
sly.--_adv._ CLANDES'TINELY. [L. _clandestinus_--_clam_, secretly.]

CLANG, klang, _v.i._ to produce a sharp, ringing sound.--_v.t._ to cause to
clang.--_n._ a sharp, ringing sound, like that made by metallic substances
struck together: (_fig._) sound, the cry of some birds.--_n._ CLANG'ING,
the sound corresponding to the verb.--_adj._ CLANG'OROUS.--_adv._
CLANG'OROUSLY.--_n._ CLANG'OUR, a clang: a sharp, shrill, harsh
sound.--_v.i._ to make a clangour. [L. _clang[)e]re_; Ger. _klang_; formed
from the sound.]

CLANK, klangk, _n._ a sharp sound, less prolonged than a clang, such as is
made by a chain.--_v.t._ or _v.i._ to make or cause a clank.--_n._
CLANK'ING, the action of the verb _clank_.--_adj._ CLANK'LESS, without
clank. [Prob. formed under the influence of CLINK and CLANG.]

CLAP, klap, _n._ the noise made by the sudden striking together of two
things, as the hands: a burst of sound: a slap.--_v.t._ to strike together
so as to make a noise: to thrust or drive together suddenly: to fasten
promptly: to pat with the hand in a friendly manner: to applaud with the
hands: to bang: to imprison--e.g. 'to clap one in prison.'--_v.i._ to
strike the hands together: to strike together with noise: to
applaud:--_pr.p._ clap'ping; _pa.p._ clapped.--_ns._ CLAP'-BOARD, a thin
board used in covering wooden houses; CLAP'-BREAD, a kind of hard-baked
oatmeal cake; CLAP'-DISH (same as CLACK-DISH); CLAP'-NET, a kind of net
which is made to clap together suddenly by pulling a string; CLAP'PER, one
who claps: that which claps, as the tongue of a bell: a glib
tongue.--_v.t._ CLAP'PER-CLAW, to claw or scratch: (_Shak._) to
scold.--_ns._ CLAP'PING, noise of striking: applause; CLAP'-SILL, the
bottom part of the frame on which lock-gates shut--called also _Lock-sill_;
CLAP'TRAP (_Shak._), a trick to gain applause: flashy display: empty words;
CLAPTRAP'PERY.--_adj._ CLAPTRAP'PISH.--CLAP EYES ON, to see; CLAP HANDS
(_Shak._), to make an agreement; CLAP HOLD OF, to seize roughly; CLAP UP
(_Shak._), to conclude suddenly. [Ice. _klappa_, to pat; Dut. and Ger.
_klappen_.]

CLAP, klap, _n._ gonorrhea. [Cf. Dut. _klapoor_.]

CLAQUE, klak, _n._ an institution for securing the success of a public
performance, by bestowing upon it preconcerted applause.--_n._ CLAQ'UEUR, a
member of the claque. [Fr. _claquer_, to clap.]

CLARABELLA, klar-a-bel'a, _n._ an organ-stop of a sweet fluty tone.

CLARENCE, klar'ens, _n._ a four-wheeled carriage, seated inside for two or
more persons. [Named after William IV. when Duke of _Clarence_.]

CLARENCEUX, CLARENCIEUX, klar'en-s[=u], _n._ (_her._) the second
king-of-arms in England, so named from the Duke of _Clarence_, son of
Edward III.

CLARENDON, klar'en-don, _n._ (_print._) a form of type having a heavy face.

CLARE-OBSCURE. Same as CHIAROSCURO.

CLARET, klar'et, _n._ originally applied to wines of a light-red colour,
but now used in England for the dark-red wines of Bordeaux: (_slang_)
blood.--_v.i._ to drink claret.--_ns._ CLAR'ET-CUP, a drink made up of iced
claret, brandy, sugar, &c.; CLAR'ET-JUG, a fancy jug for holding claret.
[Fr. _clairet_--_clair_--L. _clarus_, clear.]

CLARIFY, klar'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to make clear or pure.--_v.i._ to become
clear:--_pr.p._ clar'ifying; _pa.p._ clar'ified.--_ns._ CLARIFIC[=A]'TION;
CLAR'IFIER, that which clarifies or purifies. [L. _clarus_, clear, and
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CLARION, klar'i-on, _n._ a kind of trumpet whose note is clear and shrill:
the sound of a trumpet, or a sound resembling that of a trumpet.--_ns._
CLAR'INET, CLAR'IONET, a wind-instrument, usually of wood, in which the
sound is produced by a single thin reed.--The BASS CLARINET is pitched an
octave lower than the ordinary clarinet. [Fr. _clairon_--_clair_--L.
_clarus_, clear.]

CLARITY, klar'i-ti, _n._ clearness. [M. E. _clarté_--L. _claritas_.]

CLARTY, klar'ti, _adj._ (_Scot._) sticky and dirty. [Der. unknown.]

CLARY, kl[=a]r'i, _n._ a biennial with clammy stem, large, heart-shaped,
rough, doubly crenate leaves, and whorls of pale-blue flowers in loose
terminal spikes, with large coloured bracts. [Low L. _sclarea_. Origin
unknown.]

CLASH, klash, _n._ a loud noise, such as is caused by the striking together
of weapons: opposition: contradiction: (_Scot._) chatter, country
talk.--_v.i._ to dash noisily together: to meet in opposition: to act in a
contrary direction: to disagree: (_Scot._) to gossip.--_v.t._ to strike
noisily against.--_n._ CLASH'ING, a striking against: opposition. [Formed
from the sound, like Ger. and Sw. _klatsch_.]

CLASP, klasp, _n._ a hook for fastening: an embrace.--_v.t._ to fasten with
a clasp: to enclose and hold in the hand or arms: to embrace.--_ns._
CLASP'ER, that which clasps: the tendril of a plant; CLASP'ING;
CLASP'-KNIFE, a knife the blade of which folds into the handle. [M. E.
_clapse_, from the root of A.S. _clyppan_, to embrace. See CLIP.]

CLASS, klas, _n._ a rank or order of persons or things: high rank or social
standing: a number of students or scholars who are taught together: a
scientific division or arrangement: the position in order of merit of
students after examination.--_v.t._ to form into a class or classes: to
arrange methodically.--_v.i._ to take rank.--_adjs._ CLASS'ABLE,
CLASS'IBLE, capable of being classed.--_ns._ CLASS'-FELL'OW, CLASS'-MATE, a
pupil in the same class at school or college; CLASS'IC, any great writer or
work: a student of the ancient classics: a standard work: (_pl._) Greek,
Roman, and modern writers of the first rank, or their works.--_adjs._
CLASS'IC, -AL, of the highest class or rank, esp. in literature: originally
and chiefly used of the best Greek and Roman writers: (as opposed to
_Romantic_) like in style to the authors of Greece and Rome: chaste,
refined, in keeping with classical art: famous for literary or historical
reasons.--_ns._ CLASSICAL'ITY, CLASS'ICALNESS, the quality of being
classical.--_adv._ CLASS'ICALLY.--_ns._ CLASS'ICISM, a classical idiom;
CLASS'ICIST, one versed in the classics, or devoted to their being retained
in education; CLASS'-LEAD'ER, the leader of a class in a Methodist church;
CLASS'MAN, one who has gained honours of a certain class at the Oxford
examinations--opp. to _Passman_.--CLASSIC RACES, the five chief annual
horse-races--the Two Thousand, One Thousand, Derby, Oaks, and St
Leger.--TAKE A CLASS, to take honours in an examination, as opposed to the
mere 'pass.' [Fr. _classe_--L. _classis_, cog. with L. _cal[=a]re_, Gr.
_kalein_.]

CLASSIFY, klas'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to make or form into classes: to
arrange:--_pr.p._ class'ifying; _pa.p._ class'ified.--_adjs._
CLASSIF[=I]'ABLE, capable of being classified; CLASSIF'IC, denoting
classes.--_n._ CLASSIFIC[=A]'TION, act of forming into classes:
distribution into classes.--_adj._ CLASS'IFIC[=A]TORY.--_n._
CLASS'IF[=I]ER. [L. _classis_, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CLASSIS, klas'is, _n._ a group: judicatory. [L.]

CLASTIC, klas'tik, _adj._ breaking into fragments, fragmental. [Gr.
_klastos_--_klan_, to break.]

CLATCH, klach, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to daub.--_n._ mire, anything for daubing.

CLATCH, klach, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to finish carelessly, to botch.--_n._ a
piece of work spoiled or botched.

CLATCH, klach, _n._ (_Scot._) a kind of gig.

CLATHRATE, klath'r[=a]t, _adj._ latticed--also CLATH'ROID.--_adjs._
CLATH'ROSE, crossed by deep rectangular furrows; CLATH'RULATE, finely
clathrate. [L. _clath-r[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to furnish with a lattice--Gr.
_kl[=e]thra_, a lattice.]

CLATTER, klat'[.e]r, _n._ a repeated rattling noise: a repetition of
abrupt, sharp sounds: noisy talk: (_Burns_) gossip.--_v.i._ to make
rattling sounds: to rattle with the tongue: to talk fast and idly.--_v.t._
to strike so as to produce a rattling.--_adv._ CLATT'ERINGLY. [Acc. to
Skeat, _clatter_ = _clacker_, a freq. of CLACK.]

CLAUDE LORRAINE GLASS, _n._ a convex mirror, usually coloured, employed for
viewing landscape. [Named after the painter _Claude Lorraine_ (1600-82).]

CLAUDIAN, klaw'di-an, _adj._ pertaining to the Roman emperors of the
_Claudian_ gens (Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, Nero), or their period
(14-68 A.D.).

CLAUDICATION, klaw-di-k[=a]'shun, _n._ a halting, a limp. [L.,--_claudus_,
lame.]

CLAUGHT, kläht, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to snatch.--_n._ a hold, catch. [Cf.
CLEEK.]

CLAUSE, klawz, _n._ a sentence or part of a sentence: an article or part of
a contract, will, &c.--_adj._ CLAUS'ULAR, pertaining to, or consisting of,
a clause or clauses. [Fr. _clause_--L. _clausus_--_claud[)e]re_, to shut.]

CLAUSTRAL, klaws'tral, _adj._ cloistral, secluded, pertaining to a
claustrum.--_ns._ CLAUSTR[=A]'TION, the act of shutting in a cloister;
CLAUSTROPH[=O]'BIA, a morbid dread of confined places.--_adj._
CLAUSTROPHOB'IC.

CLAUSTRUM, klaws'trum, _n._ a thin layer of gray matter in the substance of
the hemispheres of the brain:--_pl._ CLAUS'TRA. [L.]

CLAUT, klat, _n._ a kind of rake: (_Scot._) what is raked, a
rakeful.--_v.t._ to scratch, claw.--_n.pl._ CLATS, slops.--_adj._ CLAT'TY,
dirty. [Perh. conn. with CLAW.]

CLAVATE, -D, kl[=a]'v[=a]t, -ed, _adj._ (_bot._) club-shaped: gradually
thickening to the top.--_n._ CLAV[=A]'TION, articulation in a
socket.--_adjs._ CLAV'ELLATE, having club-shaped processes; CLAV'IFORM, in
the form of a club.--_n._ CLAV'IGER, a club-bearer.--_adj._ CLAVIG'EROUS,
club-bearing. [From L. _clava_, a club.]

CLAVE, kl[=a]v, _pa.t._ of CLEAVE.

CLAVECIN, klav'e-sin, _n._ a harpsichord.--_n._ CLAV'ECINIST (_Browning_),
a player on the clavecin. [Fr. _clavecin_--L. _clavis_, a key.]

CLAVER, kl[=a]'v[.e]r, _n._ idle talk, gossip.--_v.i._ to talk idly.
[Scotch; der. uncertain; cf. Gael. _clabaire_.]

CLAVICHORD, klav'i-kord, _n._ an obsolete musical instrument, of the same
form as the _Harpsichord_ and _Spinet_.--_n._ CLAV'IHARP, a harp struck
with keys like a piano. [L. _clavis_, a key, _chorda_, a string.]

CLAVICLE, klav'i-kl, _n._ an important part of the pectoral girdle of
vertebrates, best known in the collar-bone of man and in the merry-thought
of birds--also CLAVIC'ULA.--_adj._ CLAVIC'ULAR. [Fr. _clavicule_--L.
_clavicula_, dim. of _clavis_, a key.]

CLAVICORN, klav'i-korn, _adj._ having clavate antennæ.--_n._ a member of
the _Clavicornia_, a group of _Coleoptera_ or beetles. [L. _clava_, a club,
_cornu_, a horn.]

CLAVIER, kla-v[=e]r', _n._ the keyboard of a musical instrument: a stringed
instrument, esp. the pianoforte. [Fr.,--L. _clavis_, a key.]

CLAVIS, kl[)a]'vis, _n._ a key, hence a clue or aid for solving problems,
interpreting a cipher, &c.:--_pl._ CL[=A]'VES.--_n._ CLAV'IGER, one who
keeps a key, a custodian.--_adj._ CLAVIG'EROUS, keeping keys. [L., a key.]

CLAW, klaw, _n._ the hooked nail of a beast or bird: the whole foot of an
animal with hooked nails: anything like a claw: an instrument shaped like a
claw.--_v.t._ to scratch or tear as with the claws or nails: to scrape; to
seize: (_fig._) to flatter, fawn on.--_n._ CLAW'BACK, a toady,
flatterer.--_adj._ CLAWED, having claws.--_ns._ CLAW-HAMM'ER, a hammer with
one part of the head divided into two claws, with which to extract nails;
CLAW'-HAMM'ER-COAT, a facetious name for a dress-coat.--_adj._
CLAW'LESS.--CLAW ME AND I'LL CLAW THEE, favour me and I shall do you good
in return. [A.S. _clawu_; cog. with Ger. _klaue_; akin to CLEAVE, to
stick.]

CLAY, kl[=a], _n._ a tenacious ductile earth: earth in general: the human
body: short for clay-pipe, a tobacco-pipe made of baked clay.--_v.t._ to
purify with clay, as sugar.--_adjs._ CLAY'-BRAINED (_Shak._), stupid;
CLAY'-COLD, cold as clay, lifeless.--_n._ CLAY'-EAT'ER, one addicted to
chewing a fatty clay--in Brazil and elsewhere.--_adjs._ CLAYED, clay-like;
CLAY'EY, made of clay: covered with clay.--_n._ CLAY'-GROUND, ground
consisting mainly of clay.--_adj._ CLAY'ISH, of the nature of clay.--_ns._
CLAY'-MARL, a whitish chalky clay; CLAY'-MILL, a mill for preparing clay;
CLAY'-SLATE, an argillaceous rock, splitting readily into thin sheets;
CLAY'STONE, one of the concretionary nodules in alluvial deposits.--WET
ONE'S CLAY, to drink. [A.S. _clæg_; cf. Dan. _klæg_, Ger. _klei_.]

CLAYMORE, kl[=a]'m[=o]r, _n._ a large sword formerly used by the Scottish
Highlanders, the old Celtic one-handed, two-edged longsword, now applied
inaccurately to the basket-hilted sword of the officers of Highland
regiments. [Gael. _claidheamh-mor_--Gael. and Ir. _claidheamh_, sword,
_mor_, great.]

CLEAN, kl[=e]'n, _adj._ free from dirt, stain, or whatever defiles: pure:
guiltless: neat: complete.--_adv._ quite: entirely: cleverly.--_v.t._ to
make clean, or free from dirt.--_ns._ CLEAN'OR, that which cleans;
CLEAN'ING, the act of making clean.--_adj._ CLEAN'-LIMBED, having
well-proportioned limbs: smart.--_n._ CLEAN'LINESS.--_adj._ CLEAN'LY, clean
in habits or person: pure: neat.--_adv._ in a cleanly manner.--_n._
CLEAN'NESS.--_adj._ CLEAN'-TIM'BERED (_Shak._), well-proportioned.--CLEAN
BILL OF HEALTH (see BILL OF HEALTH).--HAVE CLEAN HANDS, to be free from the
guilt of wrong-doing.--MAKE A CLEAN BREAST OF, to own up frankly, to
confess fully; SHOW A CLEAN PAIR OF HEELS, to escape by running.--THE CLEAN
THING, the right thing to do. [A.S. _cl['æ]ne_; W., Gael. _glan_, shine,
polish; Ger. _klein_, small.]

CLEANSE, klenz, _v.t._ to make clean or pure.--_adj._ CLEANS'ABLE.--_ns._
CLEANS'ER, one who, or that which, cleanses; CLEANS'ING, purification.

CLEAR, kl[=e]r, _adj._ pure, bright, undimmed: free from obstruction or
difficulty: plain, distinct: without blemish, defect, drawback, or
diminution: conspicuous: transparent.--_adv._ in a clear manner: plainly:
wholly: quite.--_v.t._ to make clear: to empty: to free from obscurity,
obstruction, or guilt: to free, acquit, or vindicate; to leap, or pass by
or over; to make profit: to settle a bill.--_v.i._ to become clear: to grow
free, bright, or transparent.--_ns._ CLEAR'AGE, a piece of land cleared;
CLEAR'ANCE, act of clearing: removal of hinderances: a certificate that a
ship has been cleared at the custom-house--that is, has satisfied all
demands and procured permission to sail.--_adjs._ CLEAR'-EYED,
clear-sighted, discerning; CLEAR'-HEAD'ED, having a clear understanding,
sagacious.--_ns._ CLEAR'ING, the act of making clear: a tract of land
cleared of wood, &c., for cultivation: a method by which bankers exchange
cheques and drafts, and arrange the differences; CLEAR'ING-HOUSE, a place
in London where such clearing business is done; CLEAR'ING-NUT, the seed of
_Strychnos potatorum_, used in the East Indies for clearing muddy
water.--_adv._ CLEAR'LY, in a clear manner: distinctly.--_ns._ CLEAR'NESS;
CLEAR'-OBSCURE' (see CHIAROSCURO).--_adj._ CLEAR'-SIGHT'ED, having
clearness of sight: discerning.--_ns._ CLEAR'-SIGHT'EDNESS;
CLEAR'-STARCH'ER, a laundress; CLEAR'-STARCH'ING, the act of stiffening
linen with clear starch; CLEAR-STORY (see CLERESTORY).--CLEAR OUT, to be
off; CLEAR THE WAY, to make the way open; CLEAR UP, to become clear. [Fr.
_clair_--L. _clarus_, clear.]

[Illustration]

CLEAT, kl[=e]t, _n._ a wedge: a piece of wood nailed across anything to
keep it in its place or give it an additional strength: a piece of wood
fastened on parts of a ship, and having holes or recesses for fastening
ropes.--_v.t._ to strengthen with a cleat. [From a supposed A.S. _cléat_;
cf. Dut. _kloot_; Dan. _klode_; Ger. _kloss_.]

CLEAVE, kl[=e]v, _v.t._ to divide, to split: to separate with violence: to
go through: to pierce.--_v.i._ to part asunder: to crack:--_pr.p._
cleav'ing; _pa.t._ cl[=o]ve or cleft; _pa.p._ clov'en or cleft.--_adj._
CLEAV'ABLE, capable of being cleft.--_ns._ CLEAV'AGE, a condition of rocks
in which they split easily into thin plates; CLEAV'ER, one who or that
which cleaves: a butcher's chopper; CLEAV'ERS, CLIV'ERS,
goose-grass--_Galium aperine_, diuretic and sudorific.--_adj._ CLEAV'ING,
splitting. [A.S. _cleófan_; cog. with Ger. _klieben_.]

CLEAVE, kl[=e]v, _v.i._ to stick or adhere: to unite:--_pr.p._ cleav'ing;
_pa.t._ cleaved or cl[=a]ve; _pa.p._ cleaved.--_n._ CLEAV'ING, the act of
adhering. [A.S. _clifian_; cog. with Ger. _kleben_, Dut. _kleven_.]

CLECHÉ, klesh'[=a], _adj._ (_her._) voided or hollowed throughout, as a
cross showing only a narrow bolder. [Fr.]

CLECK, klek, _v.t._ to hatch.--_n._ CLECK'ING, a brood. [Scot.,--Ice.
_klekja_; cf. Dan. _klække_, to hatch.]

CLEDDYO, kled'y[=o], _n._ an antique leaf-shaped bronze Celtic sword. [W.
_cleddeu_, _cleddyf_; L. _gladius_.]

CLEEK, kl[=e]k, _n._ a large hook for catching hold of something, used in
fishing, &c.: an iron-headed golf-club: a peg.--_v.t._ to seize, snatch.
[M. E. _kleken_; perh. related to CLUTCH.]

CLEF, klef, _n._ a musical character placed on the staff by which the
absolute pitch of the notes is fixed. [Fr., from L. _clavis_; Gr. _kleis_,
a key.]

CLEFT, kleft, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of CLEAVE.

CLEFT, kleft, _n._ an opening made by cleaving or splitting: a crack,
fissure, or chink.--Also CLIFT (_B._). [Cf. Ger. _kluft_, Dan. _klyft_, a
hole.]

CLEFT-PALATE. See PALATE.

CLEG, kleg, _n._ the gadfly, horse-fly. [Ice. _kleggi_.]

CLEM, klem, _v.i._ and _v.t._ to starve. [Prov. Eng. _clam_; Ger.
_klemmen_, to pinch.]

CLEMATIS, klem'a-tis, _n._ a creeping plant, called also _Virgin's Bower_
and _Traveller's Joy_. [L.,--Gr. _kl[=e]matis_--_kl[=e]ma_, a twig.]

CLEMENT, klem'ent, _adj._ mild: gentle: kind: merciful.--_ns._ CLEM'ENCE
(_Spens._), CLEM'ENCY, the quality of being clement: mildness: readiness to
forgive.--_adv._ CLEM'ENTLY. [Fr.,--L. _clemens_.]

CLENCH, klensh. Same as CLINCH.

CLEPE, kl[=e]p, _v.t._ (_arch._) to call: to name.--_pa.p._ YCLEPT. [A.S.
_clipian_, to call.]

CLEPSYDRA, klep'si-dra, _n._ an instrument used by the Greeks and Romans
for measuring time by the trickling of water. [L.,--Gr.
_klepsydra_--_kleptein_, _klepsein_, to steal, _hyd[=o]r_, water.]

CLERESTORY, CLEAR-STORY, cl[=e]r-st[=o]'ri, _n._ an upper row of windows
rising above the adjoining parts of the building, probably so named as
admitting _clearness_ or light--esp. applied to the windows in the upper
part of the central nave of churches.

CLERGY, kl[.e]r'ji, _n._ the ministers of the Christian religion, as
holders of an allotted office, in contradistinction to the laity.--_adjs._
CLER'GYABLE, CLER'GIABLE, entitled to or admitting of the benefit of
clergy.--_ns._ CLER'GYMAN, one of the clergy, a regularly ordained
minister; CLER'GY-WOM'AN, a woman belonging to a clergyman's
family.--_adjs._ CLER'IC, -AL, belonging to the clergy: pertaining to a
clerk.--_ns._ CLER'IC, a clergyman; CLER'ICALISM, undue influence of the
clergy, sacerdotalism; CLER'ICATE, clerical position; CLERIC'ITY, state of
being a clergyman; CLER'ISY, the class of learned men,
scholars.--CLERGYMAN'S SORE THROAT, chronic pharyngitis.--BENEFIT OF
CLERGY, originally an exemption of clergymen, in certain cases, from
criminal process before a secular judge, but later covering the first
offence of all who could read.--BLACK CLERGY, in Russia, the regular or
monastic, as distinct from the secular or parochial, clergy. [Fr.
_clergé_--L.,--Gr. _kl[=e]rikos_, from _kl[=e]ros_, a lot, then the
clergy.]

CLERK, klärk, or klerk, _n._ a clergyman or priest: a scholar: one who
leads the responses in the English Church service: in common use, one
employed as a writer, assistant, copyist, account-keeper, or correspondent
in an office.--_v.i._ to act as clerk.--_adj._ CLER'ICAL, pertaining to a
clerk or copyist, as in 'clerical error.'--_ns._ CLERK'DOM, CLERK'SHIP;
CLERK'ERY, CLERK'AGE, the work of a clerk.--_adjs._ CLERK'ISH, like a
clerk; CLERK'LESS, ignorant; CLERK'-LIKE, scholarly.--_n._ CLERK'LING, a
young clerk.--_adj._ CLERK'LY, scholarly.--_adv._ in a scholar-like or
learned manner.--CLERK OF THE WEATHER, an imaginary functionary facetiously
supposed to direct the weather.--BIBLE CLERK, a scholar who reads the
lessons in some college chapels. [A.S. _clerc_, a priest--Late L.
_clericus_. See CLERGY.]

CLEROMANCY, kler'o-man-si, _n._ divination by lots. [Gr. _kl[=e]ros_, lot,
_manteia_, divination.]

CLER-STORY, an obsolete form of CLERESTORY.

CLEUCH, Cleugh, kl[=u]h, _n._ a ravine with steep and precipitous sides.
[Scotch form of CLOUGH.]

CLEVE, kl[=e]v, _n._ cliff: hillside. [Now rare. M. E. _cleof_, a variant
of CLIFF.]

CLEVER, klev'[.e]r, _adj._ able or dexterous: ingenious: skilful: (_U.S._)
good-natured.--_ns._ CLEVERAL'ITY, CLEV'ERNESS.--_adj._ CLEV'ERISH,
somewhat clever.--_adv._ CLEV'ERLY. [Ety. dub.]

CLEW, CLUE, kl[=oo], _n._ a ball of thread, or the thread in it: a thread
that guides through a labyrinth: anything that solves a mystery: the corner
of a sail.--_v.t._ to coil up into a clew or ball: to truss or tie up sails
to the yards.--_n._ CLEW'-GAR'NET (_naut._), a tackle for clewing up the
smaller square sails for furling.--_n.pl._ CLEW'-LINES, ropes on the
smaller square sails by which they are clewed up for furling. [A.S.
_cliwen_; cf. Dut. _kluwen_; Ger. _knäuel_.]

CLICHÉ, kl[=e]-sh[=a]', _n._ the impression made by a die in any soft
metal: an electrotype or stereotype plate. [Fr.,--_clicher_, to
stereotype.]

CLICK, klik, _n._ a short, sharp clack or sound: anything that makes such a
sound, as a small piece of iron falling into a notched wheel: a latch for a
gate.--_v.i._ to make a light, sharp sound.--_ns._ CLICK'-CLACK, a
continuous clicking noise; CLICK'ER, the compositor who distributes the
copy among a companionship of printers, makes up pages, &c.: one who cuts
up leather for the uppers and soles of boots and shoes; CLICK'ING, the
action of the verb. [Dim. of CLACK.]

CLIENT, kl[=i]'ent, _n._ one who employs a lawyer: a dependent.--_n._
CL[=I]'ENTAGE, the whole number of one's clients: the client's relation to
the patron.--_adj._ CL[=I]ENT'AL.--_ns._ CL[=I]'ENTELE, a following: the
whole connection of a lawyer, shopkeeper, &c.; CL[=I]'ENTSHIP. [L.
_cliens_, for _cluens_, one who hears or listens (to advice), from
_clu[=e]re_, to hear.]

CLIFF, klif, _n._ (_mus._). Same as CLEF.

CLIFF, klif, _n._ a high steep rock: the steep side of a mountain.--_adjs._
CLIFFED, CLIFF'Y, having cliffs: craggy. [A.S. _clif_; Dut. _clif_; Ice.
_klif_.]

CLIFT. See CLEFT (2).

CLIFT, klift, _n._ same as CLIFF, the form arising under the influence of
CLEFT.--_adjs._ CLIFT'ED, CLIFT'Y, broken into cliffs.

CLIMACTERIC, klim-ak-t[.e]r'ik, or klim-ak't[.e]r-ik, _n._ a critical
period in human life, in which some great bodily change is supposed to take
place: a critical time.--_adj._ pertaining to such a period:
critical.--_adj._ CLIMACTER'ICAL.--THE GRAND CLIMACTERIC, the sixty-third
year, supposed to be a critical period for men. [Gr.
_klimakt[=e]r_--_klimax_, a ladder.]

CLIMATE, kl[=i]'m[=a]t, _n._ the condition of a country or place with
regard to temperature, moisture, &c.: (_fig._) character of
something.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to remain in a certain place.--_adjs._
CL[=I]'MATAL, CLIMAT'IC, -AL, relating to climate.--_v.t._ CL[=I]'MATISE
(see ACCLIMATISE).--_adj._ CLIMATOGRAPH'ICAL.--_n._ CLIMATOG'RAPHY, a
description of climates.--_adj._ CLIMATOLOG'ICAL, relating to
climatology.--_ns._ CLIMATOL'OGIST, one skilled in the science of
climatology; CLIMATOL'OGY, the science of climates, or an investigation of
the causes on which the climate of a place depends; CL[=I]'MATURE
(_Shak._), climate. [Fr.,--L.,--Gr. _klima_, _klimatos_, slope--_klinein_,
to slope.]

CLIMAX, kl[=i]'maks, _n._ (_rhet._) the arranging of the particulars of a
portion of a discourse so as to rise in strength to the last: the last term
of the rhetorical arrangement: a culmination.--_v.i._ to ascend in a
climax: to culminate.--_adjs._ CLIMACT'IC, -AL, pertaining to a
climax.--_adv._ CLIMACT'ICALLY. [Gr. _klimax_, a ladder--from _klinein_, to
slope.]

CLIMB, kl[=i]m, _v.i._ or _v.t._ to ascend or mount by clutching with the
hands and feet: to ascend with difficulty: to mount.--_adj._ CLIMB'ABLE,
capable of being climbed.--_ns._ CLIMB'ER, one who or that which climbs:
(_pl._) an old-fashioned popular title for several orders of birds whose
feet are mainly adapted for climbing: (_bot._) those plants which, having
weak stems, seek support from other objects, chiefly from other plants, in
order to ascend from the ground; CLIMB'ING. [A.S. _climban_; cf. Ger.
_klimmen_; conn. with CLAMBER and CLEAVE, to stick.]

CLIME, kl[=i]m, _n._ a country, region, tract. [A variety of CLIMATE.]

CLINAMEN, klin-[=a]'men, _n._ inclination. [L. _clin[=a]re_, to incline.]

CLINANTHIUM, klin-an'thi-um, _n._ the receptacle in a composite plant. [Gr.
_klin[=e]_, a bed, _anthos_, a flower.]

CLINCH, klinsh, CLENCH, klensh, _v.t._ to fasten or rivet a nail by bending
the point and beating the bent part flat against the object through which
the nail was driven: to grasp tightly: to set firmly, as the teeth: to
fasten on: (_fig._) to drive home an argument: to settle or confirm.--_n._
something set firmly: the fastening of a nail by beating it back, as in the
verb: a pun.--_n._ CLINCH'ER, one that clinches: a decisive
argument.--_adj._ CLINCH'ER-BUILT (same as CLINKER-BUILT).--_n._
CLINCH'ER-WORK, the disposition of the side planks of a vessel, when the
lower edge of one row overlaps the row next under it. [Causal form of
_klink_, to strike smartly; Dut. and Ger. _klinken_, to rivet a bolt.]

CLING, kling, _v.i._ to adhere or stick close by winding round: to adhere
in interest or affection: to remain by an opinion: of wood, to
shrink.--_v.t._ to attach: to shrivel:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ clung.--_n._
adherence.--_adjs._ CLING'STONE, having the pulp adhering firmly to the
stone (of peaches)--opp. to _Freestone_; CLING'Y, sticky. [A.S. _clingan_,
to shrivel up, to draw together.]

CLINIC, -AL, klin'ik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to a bed: (_med._) applied to
instruction given in hospitals at the bedside of the patient.--_n._
CLIN'IC, one confined to bed by sickness: the teaching of medicine or
surgery practically at the bedside of the patient--also CLIN'IQUE.--_adv._
CLIN'ICALLY.--CLINICAL BAPTISM, baptism administered to persons on their
sick-bed; CLINICAL CONVERT, one converted on his death-bed; CLINICAL
MEDICINE, or SURGERY, medicine or surgery as taught by clinics, a CLINICAL
LECTURE being one delivered to students at the bedside of the sick. [Gr.
_klinikos_--_klin[=e]_, a bed, from _klinein_, to recline.]

[Illustration]

CLINK, klingk, _n._ a ringing sound made by the striking together of
sounding bodies: jingle.--_v.t._ to cause to make a ringing sound.--_v.i._
to ring or jingle: to go with a clinking sound.--_n._ CLINK'ER, the name
given to the scales or globules of black oxide of iron, obtained from
red-hot iron under the blows of a hammer: the slags of iron furnaces: the
cindery-like masses which form the crust of some lava-flows.--_adj._
CLINK'ER-BUILT, made of planks which overlap each other below (as
distinguished from carvel-built) and are fastened together with clinched
nails.--_n._ CLINK'STONE, a greenish-gray or brownish compact, or very
finely crystalline igneous rock, splitting into slabs, which give a
metallic clink when struck by a hammer. [A form of CLICK and CLANK.]

CLINK, klingk, _v.t._ to clinch: to rivet. [Scot. for CLINCH.]

CLINOMETER, kl[=i]-nom'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the angle
of inclination or dip of a stratum.--_adj._ CLINOMET'RIC.--_n._
CLINOM'ETRY. [Gr. _klinein_, to incline, _metron_, a measure.]

CLINQUANT, klingk'ant, _adj._ shining like tinsel: glittering.--_n._
tinsel: glitter. [Fr.,--Dut. _klinken_, to clink.]

CLIO, kl[=i]'o, _n._ the muse of history and epic poetry: (_zool._) a genus
of shell-less molluscs in the class of Pteropods, swarming in northern and
southern seas, and named by the whalers 'whales' food,' one species of
which constitutes a principal part of the food of whales. [Gr. _kleein_, to
call.]

CLIP, klip, _v.t._ to cut by making the blades of shears meet: to cut off:
to debase the coin by cutting off the edges: to diminish.--_v.i._ to go
quickly:--_pr.p._ clip'ping; _pa.p._ clipped.--_n._ the thing clipped off,
as the wool that has been shorn off sheep: a smart blow.--_adj._ CLIPPED,
cut short.--_ns._ CLIP'PER, one that clips: a sharp-built, fast-sailing
vessel: (_slang_) a dashing person; CLIP'PING, the act of cutting, esp.
debasing coin by cutting off the edges: the thing clipped off.--_adj._
superb: fast-going.--CLIP THE WINGS, to cut a bird's wings to prevent it
from flying: (_fig._) to restrain ambition: to deprive of the means of
rising. [Prob. from Ice. _klippa_, to cut; Dan. _klippe_.]

CLIP, klip, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to embrace: to encircle: to hold firmly.--_n._
an instrument for holding things firm. [A.S. _clyppan_, to embrace; Ice.
_klýpa_, to pinch; Ger. _kluppe_, pincers.]

CLIQUE, kl[=e]k, _n._ a group of persons in union for a purpose: a party or
faction: a gang--used generally in a bad sense.--_adj._ CLIQU'ISH, relating
to a clique.--_ns._ CLIQU'ISHNESS; CLIQU'ISM, tendency to form cliques.
[Fr.; prob. from root of _click_, and so = a noisy conclave. Acc. to
Littré, orig. in sense of CLAQUE.]

CLISH-CLASH, klish'-klash, CLISHMACLAVER, klish'makl[=a]v'[.e]r, _n._
gossip. [Scot.]

CLISTOGAMY, klis-tog'a-mi, _n._ a peculiar dimorphism in the flowers of a
plant when these do not expand and are systematically close or
self-fertilised.--_adjs._ CLISTOG'AMOUS, CLISTOGAM'IC. [Gr. _kleistos_,
closed, _gamos_, marriage.]

CLITELLUM, kli-tel'um, _n._ the saddle of an annelid, as the
earthworm:--_pl._ CLITELL'A. [L.]

CLITHRAL, klith'ral, _adj._ with a roof that forms a complete covering.
[Gr.]

CLITORIS, kl[=i]'t[=o]-ris, _n._ a homologue of the penis present, as a
rudimentary organ, in the female of many higher vertebrates.--_ns._
CL[=I]'TORISM; CLITOR[=I]'TIS. [Gr.]

CLITTER, klit'[.e]r, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to make, or cause to make, a shrill
rattling noise.--_n._ CLITT'ER-CLATT'ER, idle talk, chatter. [Related to
CLATTER.]

CLIVERS. Same as CLEAVERS (q.v. under CLEAVE).

CLOACA, kl[=o]-[=a]'ka, _n._ a sewer: a privy: a cavity in birds and
reptiles, in which the intestinal and urinary ducts terminate: a sink of
moral filth:--_pl._ CLOACÆ (kl[=o]-[=a]'s[=e]).--_adjs._ CLO[=A]'CAL,
CLO[=A]'CINAL. [L. _clo[=a]ca_--_clu[)e]re_, to purge.]

CLOAK, CLOKE, kl[=o]k, _n._ a loose outer garment: a covering: that which
conceals: a disguise, pretext.--_v.t._ to clothe with a cloak: to cover: to
conceal.--_ns._ CLOAK'-BAG (_obs._), a portmanteau; CLOAK'-ROOM, a room set
apart for keeping cloaks, coats, hats, &c., at a theatre, railway station,
&c. [O. Fr. _cloke_, _cloque_--Low L. _cloca_, a bell, also a horseman's
cape, because bell-shaped, from root of CLOCK.]

CLOAM, kl[=o]m, _n._ and _adj._ earthenware, clay, or made of such. [A.S.
_clám_, mud. See CLAY.]

CLOBBER, klob'[.e]r, _n._ a paste used by shoemakers to hide the cracks in
leather. [Ety. dub.]

CLOCK, klok, _n._ a machine for measuring time, marking the time by the
position of its 'hands' upon the dial-plate, or by the striking of a hammer
on a bell: (_Shak._) the striking of the hour.--_n._ CLOCK'WORK, the works
or machinery of a clock: machinery steady and regular like that of a
clock.--_adj._ automatic.--GO LIKE CLOCKWORK, to go along smoothly and
without a hitch.--KNOW WHAT O'CLOCK IT IS, to be wide awake, to know how
things are. [M. E. _clokke_, prob. through O. Fr. from Low L. _cloca_,
_clocca_, a bell; mod. Fr. _cloche_, Dut. _klok_; Ger. _glocke_, a bell.]

CLOCK, klok, _n._ an ornament worked on the side of a stocking.--_adj._
CLOCKED, ornamented with clocks.

CLOCK, klok, _n._ a beetle--common name in Scotland.

CLOCK, klok, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to cluck: to hatch.--_n._ CLOCK'ER, a
clocking hen. [A.S. _cloccian_; Dut. _klokken_.]

CLOD, klod, _n._ a thick round mass or lump, that sticks together, esp. of
earth or turf: a concreted mass: the ground: the body of man, as formed of
clay: a stupid fellow.--_v.t._ to pelt.--_v.i._ to throw clods: (_Scot._)
to throw:--_pr.p._ clod'ding; _pa.p._ clod'ded.--_adjs._ CLOD'DISH;
CLOD'DY, abounding in clods: earthy.--_n._ CLOD'HOPPER, a countryman: a
peasant: a dolt.--_adj._ CLODHOP'PING, boorish.--_adv._ CLOD'LY.--_ns._
CLOD'PATE, CLOD'POLL, a stupid fellow.--_adj._ CLODPAT'ED, stupid. [A later
form of CLOT.]

CLOFF, klof, _n._ a cleft. [Cf. Ice. _klof_.]

CLOFF, klof, _n._ an allowance, on buying goods wholesale, of 2 lb. in
every 3 cwt., after tare and tret have been deducted. [Der. unknown.]

CLOG, klog, _n._ a piece of wood: anything hindering motion: an
obstruction: an impediment: a shoe with a wooden sole.--_v.t._ to fasten a
piece of wood to: to accumulate in a mass and cause a stoppage: to
obstruct: to encumber: to put clogs on.--_ns._ CLOG'-AL'MANAC, an early
form of almanac having the indicating characters notched on wood, horn,
&c.; CLOG'-DANCE, a dance performed with clogs, the clatter keeping time to
the music.--_adj._ CLOGGED, encumbered.--_ns._ CLOG'GER, one who makes
clogs; CLOG'GINESS.--_adj._ CLOG'GY, lumpy, sticky. [Ety. dub.; prob.
related to CLAY; cf. Scot. _clag_, to cover with mud; _claggy_, muddy,
sticky.]

CLOISON, kloi'son, _n._ a partition, dividing fillet or band.--_n._
CLOI'SONNAGE, the process of executing cloisonné work.--_adj._ CLOISONNÉ,
partitioned--of a surface decoration in enamel, the outlines of the design
formed by small fillets of metal, the interstices filled with coloured
enamel paste, vitrified.--_n._ work of this kind. [Fr.]

CLOISTER, klois't[.e]r, _n._ a covered arcade forming part of a monastic or
collegiate establishment: a place of religious retirement, a monastery or
nunnery: an enclosed place.--_v.t._ to confine in a cloister: to confine
within walls.--_adjs._ CLOIS'TERAL, CLOIS'TRAL, CLAUS'TRAL, pertaining or
confined to a cloister: secluded; CLOIS'TERED, dwelling in
cloisters.--_ns._ CLOIS'TERER, one belonging to a cloister;
CLOIS'TER-GARTH, the court or yard enclosed by a cloister; CLOIS'TRESS
(_Shak._), a nun.--THE CLOISTER, the monastic life. [O. Fr. _cloistre_
(A.S. _clauster_)--L. _claustrum_--_claud[)e]re_, _clausum_, to shut.]

CLOKE, kl[=o]k, _n._ Same as CLOAK.

CLOMB, kl[=o]m, old _pa.t._ of CLIMB.

CLONIC, klon'ik, _adj._ pertaining to clonus, with alternate convulsive
contractions and relaxations of the muscles (of spasms)--opp. to
_Tonic_.--_n._ CL[=O]'NUS, a clonic spasm. [Gr.]

CLOOP, kloop, _n._ the sound made when the cork is drawn from a bottle.
[From the sound.]

CLOOT, kloot, _n._ a cloven hoof: (_pl._) the devil.--_n._ CLOOT'IE, the
devil, because of his cloven hoof. [Scot.; ety. dub.]

CLOSE, kl[=o]s, _adj._ shut up: with no opening: confined, unventilated:
stifling: narrow: stingy: near, in time or place: intimate: compact, as
opposed to _discursive_: crowded: hidden: reserved: private:
secret.--_adv._ in a close manner: tightly; nearly: densely.--_n._ an
enclosed place: a small enclosed field: a narrow passage of a street: the
precinct of a cathedral.--_adjs._ CLOSE'-BAND'ED, closely united;
CLOSE'-BARRED, firmly closed; CLOSE'-BOD'IED, fitting close to the
body.--_n._ CLOSE'-CORPOR[=A]'TION, a corporation which fills up its own
vacancies, without outside interference.--_adjs._ CLOSE'-FIST'ED,
CLOSE'-HAND'ED, penurious, covetous; CLOSE'-GRAINED, with the fibres, &c.,
close together, compact; CLOSE'-HAULED, noting the trim of a ship when
sailing as near as possible to the wind.--_adv._ CLOSE'LY.--_ns._
CLOSE'NESS; CLOSE'-STOOL, a chamber utensil enclosed in a box or stool;
CLOSE'-SEA'SON, CLOSE'-TIME, a time of the year when it is against the law
to kill certain animals, esp. game.--_adj._ CLOSE'-TONGUED (_Shak._),
cautious in speaking. [Fr. _clos_, shut--L. _claud[)e]re_, _clausum_, to
shut.]

CLOSE, kl[=o]z, _v.t._ to make close: to draw together and unite: to
finish.--_v.i._ to come together: to grapple: to come to an end
(_with_).--_n._ the manner or time of closing: a pause or stop: the end:
junction: (_Shak._) encounter.--_ns._ CLOS'ER, one who concludes; CLOS'ING,
enclosing: ending: agreement; CLOS'URE, the act of closing: the end: the
stopping of a debate in the House of Commons by the vote of the
House.--CLOSE A BARGAIN, to make an agreement; CLOSE WITH, to accede to: to
grapple with.--WITH CLOSED DOORS, in private, the public being excluded, as
in special cases in court, &c.

CLOSET, kloz'et, _n._ a small private room: a recess off a room: a privy:
the private chamber of a sovereign, an apartment for private audience or
council, or for private or domestic devotions.--_v.t._ to shut up in or
take into a closet: to conceal:--_pr.p._ clos'eting; _pa.p._
clos'eted.--_n._ BED'-CLOS'ET, a small recess for a bed. [O. Fr. _closet_,
dim. of _clos_. See CLOSE.]

CLOT, klot, _n._ a mass of soft or fluid matter concreted, as
blood.--_v.i._ to form into clots: to coagulate:--_pr.p._ clot'ting;
_pa.p._ clot'ted.--_n._ CLOT'POLL (_Shak._), a clodpoll, a
blockhead.--_v.t._ CLOT'TER, to coagulate.--_ns._ CLOT'TINESS; CLOT'TING,
coagulation.--_adj._ CLOT'TY.--CLOTTED (also CLOUTED) CREAM, a famous
Devonshire dainty, skimmed off milk that has been 'scalded' or heated after
standing 24 hours, with a little sugar thrown on the top. [A.S. _clott_, a
clod of earth; cf. Dut. _klos_, block; Dan. _klods_; Ger. _klotz_.]

CLOTH, kloth, _n._ woven material from which garments or coverings are
made: clothing: the usual dress of a trade or profession, esp. the
clerical:--_pl._ CLOTHS.--_v.t._ CLOTHE (kl[=o]_th_), to cover with a
garment: to provide with clothes: (_fig._) to invest as with a garment: to
cover:--_pr.p._ cl[=o]th'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ cl[=o]thed or
clad.--_n.pl._ CLOTHES (kl[=o]_th_z, _coll._ kl[=o]z), garments or articles
of dress: blankets for a bed.--_ns._ CLOTHES'-BAS'KET, a large basket for
holding and carrying clothes; CLOTHES'-BRUSH, a brush for clothes;
CLOTHES'-HORSE, CLOTHES'-SCREEN, a frame for hanging clothes on to dry;
CLOTHES'-LINE, a rope or wire for hanging clothes on to dry; CLOTHES'-MOTH,
one of various tineas whose larvæ feed on furs, woollens, &c., spinning
cases out of these; CLOTHES'-PIN, a forked piece of wood to secure clothes
on a line; CLOTHES'-PRESS, a place for holding clothes; CLOTH'-HALL, a
cloth-exchange building or market; CLOTH'IER, one who makes or sells cloth;
CLOTH'ING, clothes, garments: covering; CLOTH'-YARD, formerly the yard by
which cloth was measured.--CLOTH OF GOLD, a tissue consisting of threads of
gold and silk or wool; CLOTH OF STATE, a canopy; CLOTH-YARD SHAFT, an arrow
a cloth-yard long.--CLOTHE IN WORDS, to express ideas in words; CLOTHE ON,
or UPON, to invest: to cover.--AMERICAN CLOTH, a kind of enamelled cloth,
used for covering chairs, &c.--THE CLOTH, the clerical profession: the
clergy. [A.S. _cláth_, cloth; Ger. _kleid_, a garment.]

CLOTURE, klot'[=u]r, _n._ Same as CLOSURE. [Fr. _clôture_--L.
_claud[)e]re_, _clausum_, to shut.]

CLOUD, klowd, _n._ a mass of fog, consisting of minute particles of water,
often in a frozen state, floating in the atmosphere: (_fig._) anything
unsubstantial: a great number or multitude of anything, as the New Test.
'cloud of witnesses:' anything that obscures, as a cloud: a dark spot on a
lighter material: a great volume of dust or smoke: anything gloomy,
overhanging, or bodeful.--_v.t._ to overspread with clouds: to darken: to
defame: to stain with dark spots or streaks.--_v.i._ to become clouded or
darkened.--_ns._ CLOUD'AGE; CLOUD'-BERR'Y, a low plant related to the
bramble, found on elevated moors in Britain, with an orange-red berry of
delightful flavour.--_adj._ CLOUD'-BUILT, made of clouds,
unsubstantial.--_n._ CLOUD'-BURST, a sudden flood of rain over a small
area.--_adjs._ CLOUD'-CAPT (_Shak._), capped with or touching the clouds;
CLOUD'-COMPEL'LING, driving or collecting the clouds, an epithet of
Jupiter; CLOUD'ED, hidden by clouds: (_fig._) darkened: indistinct:
variegated with spots, as a 'clouded cane,' &c.--_n._ CLOUD'ERY.--_adv._
CLOUD'ILY.--_ns._ CLOUD'INESS; CLOUD'ING, a cloudy appearance.--_adj._
growing dim.--_adjs._ CLOUD'-KISS'ING (_Shak._), touching the clouds;
CLOUD'LESS, unclouded, clear.--_adv._ CLOUD'LESSLY.--_n._ CLOUD'LET, a
little cloud.--_adjs._ CLOUD'-TOPPED, covered with or touching the clouds;
CLOUD'Y, darkened with, or consisting of, clouds: obscure: gloomy: stained
with dark spots: (_coll._) 'shady.'--WAIT TILL THE CLOUDS ROLL BY, to wait
for more favourable circumstances.--UNDER A CLOUD, in trouble or disfavour.
[A.S. _clúd_, a hill, then a cloud, the root idea being a mass or ball.
CLOD and CLOT are from the same root.]

CLOUGH, kluf, or klow, _n._ a ravine: a valley. [Scot. _cleuch_; ety. dub.]

CLOUR, kl[=oo]r, _n._ a knock: a swelling caused by a knock.--_v.t._ to
knock: to raise a bump. [Scot.; cf. Ice. _klór_.]

CLOUT, klowt, _n._ a piece of cloth used for mending: a rag: a piece of
cloth used by archers to shoot at, then the shot itself: a blow: a
cuff.--_v.t._ to mend with a patch: to cover with a cloth: to
cuff.--_p.adj._ CLOUT'ED (_Shak._), heavy and patched, as shoes having
nails in the soles: covered with a clout.--_adj._ CLOUT'ERLY,
clownish.--_ns._ CLOUT'-NAIL, a large-headed nail used for the soles of
boots; CLOUT'-SHOE, a shoe having the sole protected by clout-nails. [A.S.
_clút_; cf. Ice. _klútr_, a kerchief; Dan. _klud_, rag.]

CLOUTED, klowt'ed, _p.adj._ clotted, as cream. [See CLOT.]

CLOVE, kl[=o]v, _pa.t._ of CLEAVE.--_n._ CLOVE'-HITCH (see HITCH.)

CLOVE, kl[=o]v, _n._ the unexpanded flower-bud of the clove-tree, a native
of the Moluccas, used as a spice.--_ns._ CLOVE'-GILL'YFLOWER, a
clove-scented species of pink; CLOVE'-PINK, a variety of pink which has an
odour like that of cloves. [Fr. _clou_, in full _clou de girofle_, nail of
the girofle, so called from the shape of the bud and its stalk--L.
_clavus_, a nail.]

CLOVEN, cl[=o]v'n, _p.adj._ split: divided.--_adjs._ CLOV'EN-FOOT'ED,
CLOV'EN-HOOFED, having the hoof divided, as the ox or sheep.--THE CLOVEN
HOOF, applied to any indication of devilish agency or temptation, from the
early representation of the devil with cloven hoofs--prob. from Pan, some
of whose characteristics he shares. [Pa.p. of CLEAVE, to divide.]

CLOVER, kl[=o]v'[.e]r, _n._ a genus of plants containing a great number of
species, natives chiefly of temperate climates, affording rich
pasturage.--_adj._ CLOV'ERED, covered with clover.--_n._ CLOV'ER-GRASS,
clover.--_adj._ CLOV'ERY, abounding in clover.--LIVE IN CLOVER, to live
luxuriously or in abundance. [A.S. _cláfre_; Dut. _klaver_; Dan. _klöver_;
Ger. _klee_.]

CLOWN, klown, _n._ a rustic or country-fellow: one with the rough manners
of a countryman: an ill-bred fellow: a fool or buffoon.--_ns._ CLOWN'ERY, a
clown's performance; CLOWN'ING, acting the clown.--_adj._ CLOWN'ISH, of or
like a clown: coarse and awkward: rustic.--_adv._ CLOWN'ISHLY.--_ns._
CLOWN'ISHNESS; CLOWN'SHIP. [Prob. conn. with CLOD, and CLOT.]

CLOY, kloi, _v.t._ to fill to loathing: to satiate: (_Spens._) to
gore:--_pr.p._ cloy'ing; _pa.p._ cloyed.--_adjs._ CLOYED, clagged:
cumbered; CLOY'ING, satiating; CLOY'LESS (_Shak._) that cannot cloy.--_n._
CLOY'MENT (_Shak._), satiety, surfeit.--_adj._ CLOY'SOME, satiating. [Fr.
_clouer_, to drive a nail into, to spike or stop, as a gun, from L.
_clavus_, a nail.]

CLOY, kloi, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to stroke with a claw. [Perh. a corr. of
CLAW.]

CLUB, klub, _n._ a heavy tapering stick, knobby or massy at one end, used
to strike with: a cudgel: a bat used in certain games: an instrument for
playing golf, variously with wooden heads, iron heads, and wooden heads
with brass soles: a bunch; one of the four suits of cards: a combination: a
clique, set: an association of persons for the joint study of literature,
politics, &c., or for social ends: an association of persons who possess a
building as a common resort for the members: a club-house, or the house
occupied by a club.--_v.t._ to beat with a club: to gather into a bunch: to
combine: to throw soldiers into confusion.--_v.i._ to join together for
some common end: to combine together: to share in a common
expense.--_adjs._ CLUB'BABLE, sociable; CLUBBED, like a club.--_n._
CLUB'BING, beating: combination: a disease in some plants.--_adj._
CLUB'BISH, given to clubs.--_ns._ CLUB'BISM, the club system; CLUB'BIST,
CLUB'-FOOT, a deformed foot.--_adj._ CLUB'-FOOT'ED.--_n._ CLUB'-GRASS, a
species of grass having a club-shaped articulation.--_v.t._ CLUB'-HAUL,
(_naut._), to tack by dropping the lee anchor and slipping the
cable.--_adj._ CLUB'HEAD'ED, having a thick head.--_ns._ CLUB'-HOUSE, a
house for the accommodation of a club; CLUB'-LAW, government by violence;
CLUB'-MAN, one who carries a club: a member of a club; CLUB'-MAS'TER, the
manager of, or purveyor for, a club; CLUB'-MOSS, one of the four genera of
_Lycopodiaceæ_; CLUB'-ROOM, the room in which a club meets; CLUB'-RUSH, a
plant of many varieties of the genus _Scripus_ or rush.--_n.pl._ CLUBS (see
CLUMPS). [Ice. and Sw. _klubba_; same root as CLUMP.]

CLUCK, kluk, _n._ the call of a hen to her chickens: any similar
sound.--_v.i._ to make the sound of a hen when calling on her
chickens.--_n._ CLUCK'ING, the noise made by a hen when calling her
chickens.--_adj._ that clucks. [From the sound, like Dut. _klokken_, Ger.
_glucken_, Dan. _klukke_.]

CLUE, kl[=oo] (see CLEW).--_adj._ CLUE'LESS, without trace.

CLUMBER, klumb'[.e]r, _n._ a kind of spaniel. [_Clumber_, in Notts, a seat
of the Duke of Newcastle.]

CLUMP, klump, _n._ a thick, short, shapeless piece of anything: a cluster
of trees or shrubs: a thick sole put on in addition.--_v.i._ to walk
heavily.--_v.t._ to put in a clump.--_n.pl._ CLUMPS, a parlour game of
question and answer--also CLUBS.--_adj._ CLUMP'Y, abounding in clumps:
heavy. [Prob. Scand.; Dan. _klump_, a lump. Cf. Ger. _klump_, and CLUB.]

CLUMSY, klum'zi, _adj._ shapeless: ill-made: unwieldy: awkward:
ungainly.--_adj._ CLUM'SILY.--_n._ CLUM'SINESS. [M. E. _clomsen_, to be
stiff or benumbed; most prob. Scand.; allied to CLAMP.]

CLUNCH, klunsh, _n._ the miner's name for tough indurated clay, sometimes
found in the coal-measures. [Ety. dub.; prob. related to CLUMP.]

CLUNG, klung, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of CLING.

CLUNK, klungk, _n._ the sound of a liquid coming out of a bottle when the
cork has been quickly drawn.--_v.i._ to make such a sound. [Scot.; from the
sound.]

CLUPEOID, kl[=oo]'p[=e]-oid, _n._ a kind of herring. [L. _clupea_, a kind
of fish.]

CLUSTER, klus't[.e]r, _n._ a number of things of the same kind growing or
joined together: a bunch: a mass: a crowd.--_v.i._ to grow or gather into
clusters.--_v.t._ to collect into clusters; to cover with
clusters.--_adjs._ CLUS'TERED, grouped; CLUS'TERING, CLUS'TERY.--CLUSTERED
COLUMN, a pier which consists of several columns or shafts clustered
together. [A.S. _clyster_; Low Ger. _kluster_; cf. CLOT.]

CLUTCH, kluch, _v.t._ to close the hand: to carry off: to hold firmly: to
seize or grasp.--_n._ a grasp; seizure.--_n.pl._ CLUTCH'ES, the hands or
paws: cruelty: rapacity. [M. E. _cloche_, _cloke_, claw; prob. allied to M.
E. _clechen_--A.S. _gelæccan_. Cf. LATCH.]

CLUTCH, kluch, _n._ (_prov._) a brood of chickens, a 'sitting' of
eggs.--_v.t._ to hatch.

CLUTTER, klut'[.e]r, _n._ confusion: stir: noise.--_v.i._ to crowd
together: to go about noisily.--_v.t._ to pack. [A variant of CLATTER.]

CLY, kl[=i], _v.t._ (_slang_) to seize, steal.--_ns._ CLY'-FAK'ER, a
pickpocket; CLY'-FAK'ING, pocket-picking. [Prob. related to CLAW; referred
by some to Dut. _kleed_, a garment, 'to fake a cly' = to take a garment.]

CLYPEUS, klip'[=e]-us, _n._ the shield-like part of an insect's
head.--_adjs._ CLYP'[=E]AL, CLYP'[=E]ATE, CLYP'[=E]IFORM, in the shape or
form of a shield. [L. _clipeus_, _clypeus_, a shield.]

CLYSTER, klis't[.e]r, _n._ a liquid injected into the intestines to wash
them out.--_n._ CLYS'TER-PIPE (_Shak._), a pipe or syringe for injecting a
clyster. [Fr.,--L.,--Gr. _klyzein_, to wash out.]

CNIDA, kn[=i]'da, _n._ one of the thread-cells of the _Coelenterata_,
whence is their power of stinging:--_pl._ CN[=I]'DÆ. [Late L.,--Gr.
_knid[=e]_, a nettle.]

CO., k[=o], an abbreviation for COMPANY.

CO-, k[=o], a common prefix, signifying jointness, accompaniment,
connection. [L. _cum_, with.]

COACH, k[=o]ch, _n._ a large, close, four-wheeled carriage: a private
tutor: a professional trainer in athletics.--_v.t._ to carry in a coach: to
tutor, instruct, prepare others for, as an examination or a rowing contest,
&c.--_v.t._ to study under a tutor.--_ns._ COACH'-BOX, the seat on which
the driver of a coach sits; COACH'DOG, a spotted dog, kept chiefly as an
attendant on coaches, called also _Dalmatian Dog_; COACH'EE, COACH'Y, a
coachman; COACH'-FELL'OW, a yoke-fellow, comrade; COACH'-HIRE, money paid
for the use of a hired coach; COACH'-HORSE, a horse used for drawing a
coach; COACH'-HOUSE, a house to keep a coach in; COACH'ING, travelling by
coach: tutoring: instruction; COACH'MAN, the driver of a coach;
COACH'-OFF'ICE, a booking-office for passengers and parcels by stage-coach;
COACH'-STAND, a place where coaches stand for hire; COACH'-WHEEL;
COACH'-WHIP.--_adj._ COACH'Y, pertaining to a coach. [Fr. _coche_--Hung.
_kocsi_ (pron. kot'shi), from _Kocs_, a place south of Komorn.]

COACT, k[=o]-akt', _v.i._ (_Shak._) to act together.--_adj._ COACT'IVE
(_Shak._), acting together.--_n._ COACTIV'ITY.

COACT, k[=o]-akt', _v.t._ to compel.--_n._ COAC'TION, compulsion.--_adj._
COACT'IVE, compulsory. [L. _cog[)e]re_, _coactum_, to compel.]

COADJACENT, k[=o]-ad-j[=a]s'ent, _adj._ contiguous.--_n._ COADJAC'ENCY.
[CO- and ADJACENT.]

COADJUTANT, k[=o]-ad-j[=oo]'tant, or ko-ad'joo-tant, _adj._ mutually
helping or assisting.--_n._ one of several who help another.--_ns._
COADJU'TOR, a helper or assistant: an associate:--_fem._ COADJU'TRESS,
COADJU'TRIX; COADJU'TORSHIP. [L. _co_, with, _adjutor_, a helper--_ad_, to,
_juv-[=a]re_, to help.]

COADUNATE, k[=o]-ad'[=u]-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to unite: to combine.--_n._
COADUN[=A]'TION.--_adj._ COAD'UN[=A]TIVE. [CO-, and L. _adun[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_, to unite.]

CO-AGENCY, k[=o]-[=a]'jen-si, _n._ agency with another.--_n._ CO-[=A]'GENT,
one acting with another.

COAGULATE, k[=o]-ag'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to make to curdle or
congeal.--_v.i._ to curdle or congeal.--_adj._ clotted: congealed.--_n._
COAGULABIL'ITY.--_adj._ COAG'ULABLE.--_ns._ COAG[=U]'LANT, a substance
which causes coagulation, as rennet; COAGUL[=A]'TION.--_adjs._
COAG'UL[=A]TIVE; COAG'UL[=A]TORY.--_n._ COAG'ULUM, what is coagulated. [L.
_coagul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, _co-_, together, _ag-[)e]re_, to drive.]

COAITA, k[=o]-[=i]'ta, _n._ a small South American monkey--the red-faced
Spider Monkey.

COAL, k[=o]l, _n._ a solid, black, combustible substance used for fuel, dug
out of the earth: cinder.--_v.i._ to take in coal.--_v.t._ to supply with
coal.--_n._ COAL'-BED, a stratum of coal.--_adj._ COAL'-BLACK, black as
coal, very black.--_ns._ COAL'-BOX, a box for holding coal; COAL'-BRASS, a
name applied to the pyrites in the coal-measures; COAL'FIELD, a field or
district containing coal strata; COAL'-FISH, a fish of the cod family, so
named from the black colour of its back; COAL'-GAS, the mixture of gases
produced by the destructive distillation of coal, chiefly carburetted
hydrogen--giving the gaslight in common use; COAL'-HEAV'ER, one employed in
carrying coal; COAL'-HOUSE, a covered-in place for keeping coal; COAL'MAN,
one who has to do with coals; COAL'-MAS'TER, the owner or lessee of a
coalfield; COAL'-MEAS'URE, a measure by which the quantity of coal is
ascertained: (_pl._) the group of carboniferous strata in which coal is
found (_geol._); COAL'-MINE, COAL'-PIT, a pit or mine from which coal is
dug; COAL'-OWN'ER, one who owns a colliery; COAL'-PLANT, a fossil plant of
the carboniferous strata; COAL'-SCUTT'LE, a vessel for holding coal;
COAL'-TAR, or _Gas-tar_, a thick, black, opaque liquid which condenses in
the pipes when coal or petroleum is distilled; COAL'-TRIM'MER, one who
stores or shifts coal on board vessels; COAL'-WHIP'PER, one employed in
unloading coal from vessels at anchor to barges which convey it to the
wharves.--_adj._ COAL'Y, of or like coal.--COALING STATION, a port at which
steamships take in coal; COAL-SCUTTLE BONNET, a woman's bonnet, shaped like
a coal-scuttle upside down.--BLIND or ANTHRACITE COAL, that which does not
flame when kindled; BITUMINOUS COAL, that which does; BROWN COAL (see
BROWN); CAKING COAL, a bituminous coal which cakes or fuses into one mass
in the fire; CANNEL or PARROT COAL (see CANNEL); CHERRY or SOFT COAL, coal
breaking off easily into small, irregular cubes, having beautiful shining
lustre; SPLINT, HARD, or BLOCK COAL, plentiful in Scotland, hard, breaking
into cuboidal blocks.--BLOW THE COALS, to excite passion; CARRY COALS TO
NEWCASTLE, to take a thing where it is least needed; HAUL OVER THE COALS,
reprimand--from the discipline applied to heretics; HEAP COALS OF FIRE ON
THE HEAD, to excite remorse by returning good for evil (Rom. xii. 20).
[A.S. _col_; cog. with Ice. _kol_, Ger. _kohle_.]

COALESCE, k[=o]-al-es', _v.i._ to grow together or unite into one body: to
associate.--_adj._ COALES'CENT, uniting.--_n._ COALES'CENCE, union. [L.
_coalesc[)e]re_, _co-_, together, and _alesc[)e]re_, to grow up.]

COALITION, k[=o]-al-ish'un, _n._ act of coalescing, or uniting into one
body: a union of persons, states, &c., which agree to sink their
differences and act in common: alliance.--_v.i._ C[=O]'ALISE, to make an
alliance.--_n._ COALI'TIONIST, one of a coalition.

COAMINGS, k[=o]m'ingz, _n.pl._ (_naut._) raised work about the edges of the
hatches of a ship to prevent the water from running into the apartments
below. [Der. unknown.]

COAPTATION, ko-ap-t[=a]'shun, _n._ adaptation of parts to each other. [L.]

COARB. See COMARB.

COARCTATE, k[=o]-ark't[=a]t, _adj._ compressed.--_n._ COARCT[=A]'TION. [L.
_coart[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to compress together.]

COARSE, k[=o]rs, _adj._ rough: rude: uncivil: vulgar: harsh: gross.--_adj._
COARSE'-GRAINED, coarse in the grain, as wood: (_fig._) inelegant,
gross.--_adv._ COARSE'LY.--_v.t._ COARS'EN, to make coarse.--_n._
COARSE'NESS.--_adj._ COARS'ISH, somewhat coarse. [From phrase 'in course,'
hence _ordinary_.]

COAST, k[=o]st, _n._ side or border of land next the sea: the seashore:
limit or border of a country.--_v.i._ to sail along or near a coast: to
travel downhill on a bicycle with the feet on the foot-rests.--_v.t._ to
sail by or near to.--_ns._ COAST'ER, a vessel that sails along the coast;
COAST'-GUARD, a body of men organised to act as a guard along the coast,
originally intended to prevent smuggling.--_adj._ COAST'ING, keeping near
the coast: trading between ports in the same country.--_n._ the act of
sailing, or of trading, along the coast: advances towards acquaintance,
courtship: riding downhill on a bicycle with the feet up.--_ns._
COAST'-LINE, the line or boundary of a coast: shore-line; COAST'-WAIT'ER, a
custom-house officer who waits upon and superintends the cargoes of vessels
engaged in the coasting trade.--_advs._ COASTWARD, -S, toward the coast;
COAST'WISE, along the coast.--_adj._ carried on along the coast. [O. Fr.
_coste_ (Fr. _côte_)--L. _costa_, a rib, side.]

COAT, k[=o]t, _n._ a kind of outer garment: the hair or wool of a beast:
vesture or habit: any covering: a garment worn by women and children, and
hanging from the waist downwards: a membrane or layer, such as paint, &c.:
a coat of arms.--_v.t._ to clothe: to cover with a coat or layer.--_ns._
COAT'-ARM'OUR, coat of arms: armorial devices; COAT'-CARD, a card bearing
the representation of a coated figure, the king, queen, or knave--now, less
correctly, called _Court-card_; COATEE', a close-fitting coat with short
tails; COAT'ING, a covering: cloth for coats.--COAT OF ARMS, the family
insignia embroidered on the surcoat worn over the hauberk, or coat of mail:
the heraldic bearings of a gentleman; COAT OF MAIL, a piece of armour for
the upper part of the body, made of metal scales or rings linked one with
another.--TURN ONE'S COAT, to change one's principles, or to turn from one
party to another. [O. Fr. _cote_ (Fr. _cotte_)--Low L. _cottus_, _cotta_, a
tunic; the further ety. is uncertain.]

COATI, k[=o]-ä'ti, or k[=o]'a-ti, _n._ an American plantigrade carnivorous
mammal allied to the raccoons.--Also COÄ'TI-MUN'DI. [Tupi.]

COAX, k[=o]ks, _v.t._ to persuade by fondling or flattery: to humour or
soothe: to pet.--_ns._ COAX, COAX'ER, one who coaxes.--_adv._ COAX'INGLY.
[M. E. _cokes_, a simpleton; of obscure origin.]

CO-AXIAL, k[=o]-ak'si-al, _adj._ having the same axis.--_adv._ COAX'IALLY.

COB, kob, _n._ a head of maize: a short-legged strong horse for heavy
weights: a male swan--also COB'-SWAN.--_ns._ COB'LOAF, a large loaf:
(_Shak._) an expression of contempt; COB'NUT, a large variety of the
hazel-nut: a game played by children with nuts. [Prob. conn. with COP.]

COB, kob, _n._ a kind of composition of clay and straw for building.--_n._
COB'-WALL, a wall built of this.

COB, kob, _v.t._ to strike, to thump the buttocks.

COBALT, k[=o]'bawlt, _n._ a metal the ores of which are sparingly
distributed--in the metallic state found in meteoric stones or aerolites,
generally occurring combined with arsenic: a blue pigment, prepared from
the foregoing--also C[=O]'BALT-BLUE.--_adj._ of this deep-blue
colour.--_adjs._ COBALT'IC; COBALTIF'EROUS.--_n._ C[=O]'BALTITE, a
sulpharsenide of cobalt. [Ger. _kobalt_, from _kobold_, a demon, a nickname
given by the German miners, because they supposed it to be a mischievous
and hurtful metal.]

COBBLE, kob'l, _n._ a stone worn smooth by water.--_n._ COBB'LE-STONE, a
rounded stone used in paving.--_v.t._ to pave with such. [Ety. dub.]

COBBLE, kob'l, _v.t._ to patch up or mend coarsely, as shoes.--_ns._
COBB'LER, one who cobbles or mends shoes: a drink made up of wine, sugar,
&c., and sucked through a straw; COBBLER'S PUNCH, a warm drink made of
beer, with the addition of spirit, sugar, and spice. [Der. unknown.]

CO-BELLIGERENT, k[=o]-be-lij'e-rent, _adj._ and _n._ co-operating in
warfare.

COBLE, COBBLE, kob'l, _n._ a small flat-bottomed fishing-boat. [Cf. W.
_ceubal_, a hollow trunk, a boat.]

COBRA, COBRA DA CAPELLO, k[=o]'bra da ka-pel'o, _n._ a poisonous snake,
native of the East Indies, which dilates the back and sides of the neck so
as to resemble a hood. [Port., lit. 'snake of the hood.']

COBURG, k[=o]'burg, _n._ a thin fabric of worsted with cotton or silk,
twilled on one side. [_Coburg_, a town in Germany.]

COBWEB, kob'web, _n._ the spider's web or net: any snare or device intended
to entrap: anything flimsy or easily broken: anything that obscures.--_n._
COBWEB'BERY.--_adj._ COB'WEBBY. [Prob. shortened from M. E.
_atter-cop-web_--A.S. _átor_, poison, and _coppa_--W. _cop_, a head, tuft.
See also WEB.]

COCA, k[=o]'ka, _n._ a shrub of six or eight feet high, of which the leaves
furnish an important narcotic and stimulant.--_ns._ COCAINE (k[=o]'kä-in),
a local anæsthetic made from coca-leaves, and much used in dentistry and
surgical operations; COCAINIS[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ C[=O]'CAINISE.--_n._
C[=O]'CAINISM, a morbid condition induced by over-use of cocaine.
[Sp.,--Peruv.]

COCAGNE, COCAIGNE. Same as COCKAIGNE.

COCCIFEROUS, kok-sif'[.e]r-us, _adj._ berry-bearing. [L. _coccum_ (--Gr.
_kokkos_), a berry, and _ferre_, to bear.]

COCCOLITE, kok'[=o]-l[=i]t, _n._ a variety of pyroxene: a small rounded
body found in deep-sea mud.--Also COCC'OLITH. [Gr. _kokkos_, a berry,
_lithos_, a stone.]

COCCUS, kok'us, _n._ one of the carpels or seed-vessels of a dry fruit:
(_zool._) a genus of insects in the order _Hemiptera_, and type of a family
including many forms injurious to plants, and a few others useful to
man.--_n._ COCC'ULUS, a tropical genus of climbing plants
(_Menispermaceæ_).--COCCULUS INDICUS, a drug consisting of the dried fruit
of _Anamirta cocculus_, having narcotic and poisonous properties--yielding
_picrotoxin_. [L.,--Gr. _kokkos_, a berry.]

COCCYX, kok'siks, _n._ (_anat._) the lower bone of the vertebral
column:--_pl._ COC'CYGES.--_adjs._ COCCYG'[=E]AL, COCCYG'IAN. [Gr.
_kokkyx_, the cuckoo, from its bill.]

COCH, koch, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as COACH.

COCHIN, k[=o]'chin, _n._ a large-sized variety of the domestic hen, with
feathered legs, full breast, small tail.--_n._ C[=O]'CHIN-CHIN'A, a
large-sized hen originally from _Cochin-China_.--_adj._
C[=O]'CHIN-CHINESE'.

COCHINEAL, koch'i-n[=e]l, _n._ a scarlet dye-stuff consisting of the dried
bodies of certain insects gathered from the cactus plant in Mexico, the
West Indies, &c.: the insect itself. [Sp. _cochinilla_, dim. of L.
_coccinus_--Gr. _kokkos_, a berry, as the cochineal was formerly supposed
to be the berry or seed of the plant.]

COCHLEA, kok'le-a, _n._ a spiral-shaped shell, esp. the snail-shell:
(_anat._) the spiral cavity of the ear.--_adjs._ COCHLEAR'IFORM;
COCH'LEARY, COCH'LE[=A]TE, COCH'LE[=A]TED, twisted. [L.,--Gr. _kochlias_, a
snail.]

COCK, kok, _n._ the male of birds, particularly of the domestic fowl: the
time of cock-crowing: a weathercock: a plucky chap, a term of familiarity,
as 'Old cock:' a strutting chief or leader: anything set erect: a tap for
liquor: part of the lock of a gun, held back by a spring, which, when
released by the trigger, produces the discharge.--_v.t._ to set erect or
upright: to set up, as the hat: to draw back the cock of a gun: to turn up
to one side: to tilt up knowingly, inquiringly, or scornfully.--_v.i._ to
strut: to swagger.--_ns._ COCK[=A]DE', a knot of ribbons or something
similar worn on the hat as a badge; COCKAL[=O]'RUM, a bumptious little
person: a boy's game; COCK'-BROTH, the broth made from a boiled cock;
COCK'CHAFER, the May-bug, an insect of a pitchy-black colour, most
destructive to vegetation; COCK'-CROW, -ING, early morning, the time at
which cocks crow.--_adj._ COCKED, set erect: turned up at one side.--_ns._
COCK'ER, one who follows cock-fighting: a small dog of the spaniel kind
employed by sportsmen in pheasant and woodcock shooting; COCK'EREL, a young
cock: a young man--also COCK'LE, whence COCK'LE-BRAINED, foolish;
COCK'-EYE, a squinting eye: the loop by which a trace is attached to the
whipple-tree.--_adj._ COCK'-EYED.--_ns._ COCK'-FIGHT, -ING, a fight or
contest between game-cocks: a fight; COCK'-HORSE, a child's
rocking-horse.--_adj._ prancing, proud.--_adv._ properly _a-cock-horse_ =
_on cock-horse_, on horseback: exultingly.--_ns._ COCK'LAIRD (_Scot._), a
yeoman; COCK'LOFT, the room in a house next the roof; COCK'-MATCH, a
cock-fight; COCK'PIT, a pit or enclosed space where game-cocks fought: a
room in a ship-of-war for the wounded during an action; COCK'ROACH, the
common black beetle; COCKS'COMB, the comb or crest on a cock's head: a fop:
the name of various plants; COCK'SHUT (_Shak._), twilight, probably
referring to the time when poultry are shut up; COCK'-SHY, a free throw at
a thing, as for amusement.--_adj._ COCK'-SURE, quite sure, often without
cause.--_n._ COCK'SWAIN (see COXSWAIN).--_adjs._ COCK'SY, COX'Y,
bumptious.--_n._ COCK'TAIL, a racing horse that is not thoroughbred: one
who apes the gentleman: (_U.S._) a drink of spirits flavoured with various
ingredients.--_adjs._ COCK'TAILED, having the tail cocked or tilted up;
COCK'Y, impudent.--_ns._ COCK'Y-LEEK'Y, soup made of a fowl boiled with
leeks; COCK'YOLLY, a nursery or pet name for a bird.--COCK-A-DOODLE-DOO,
the cry of the cock; COCK-A-HOOP, a phrase expressing reckless exultation;
COCK AND PIE, used as an exclamation (see PIE, 2); COCKED HAT, the
old-fashioned three-cornered hat, the triangular pointed hat worn as part
of some full-dress uniforms: a note folded into a three-cornered shape;
COCK OF THE WALK, chief of a set; COCK'S-FOOT GRASS, a genus of grasses
very abundant in Britain, and furnishing an important part of both natural
and artificial pastures; COCK THE EYE (_coll., humorous_), to wink.--A
COCK-AND-BULL STORY, an incredible tale.--FULL-COCK, when the cock of a gun
is drawn full back: when a tap is full open; HALF-COCK, the position of the
cock of a gun when drawn back half the whole distance.--KNOCK INTO A COCKED
HAT, 'to lick out of shape:' to give a profound beating. [A.S. _coc_; Ice.
_kokkr_.]

COCK, kok, _n._ a small pile of hay.--_adj._ COCKED, heaped up in cocks.
[Sw. _koka_, a lump of earth; Dut. _kogel_; Ger. _kugel_, a ball.]

COCK, kok, _n._ (_Shak._) a cock-boat. Now COCK-BOAT.

COCK, perversion of the word _God_.--COCK AND PIE (see PIE, 2).

COCK-A-BON'DY, kok-a-bon'di, _n._ a fly for angling. [A corr. of Welsh
_coch a bon ddu_, red, with black stem.]

COCKAIGNE, COCKAYNE, kok-[=a]n', _n._ an imaginary country of luxury and
delight. [Ety. dub.; Fr. _cocagne_, acc. to some from L. _coqu[)e]re_, to
cook.]

COCKATOO, kok-a-t[=oo]', _n._ a popular name for several genera and species
of parrots. [Malay, _kakatúa_, prob. from its cry.]

COCKATRICE, kok'a-tr[=i]s, _n._ a fabulous monster like a serpent, often
confounded with the Basilisk (q.v.), and regarded as possessing similar
deadly powers. [O. Fr. _cocatrice_.]

COCK-BOAT, kok'-b[=o]t, _n._ a small ship's boat: a small frail boat. [See
COG, a small boat.]

COCKER, kok'[.e]r, _v.t._ to pamper: to fondle: to indulge. [Ety. dub.; cf.
Dut. _kokelen_, O. Fr. _coqueliner_, to dandle.]

COCKERNONY, kok'[.e]r-non-i, _n._ (_Scot._) the gathering of a young
woman's hair, when it is wrapped up in a band or fillet, commonly called a
'snood' (_Jamieson_).

COCKET, kok'et, _n._ the custom-house official seal: a document given by
the officers of the custom-house to merchants, as a warrant that their
goods are duly entered: the office where such goods are entered. [Perh. a
corr. of the words _quo quietus_.]

COCKLE, kok'l, _n._ a troublesome weed among corn, with a purple flower.
[A.S. _coccel_.]

COCKLE, kok'l, _n._ a large and typical genus of bivalve molluscs, having a
thick, ribbed, heart-shaped, equal-valved shell.--_adj._ COCK'LED, shelled
like a cockle.--_ns._ COCK'LE-HAT, a hat bearing a scallop-shell, the badge
of a pilgrim; COCK'LE-SHELL, the shell of a cockle: a frail boat.--THE
COCKLES OF THE HEART, the heart itself. [Fr. _coquille_--Gr.
_kongchylion_--_kongch[=e]_, a cockle.]

COCKLE, kok'l, _v.i._ to pucker into wrinkles or ridges.--_v.t._ to cause
to pucker.

COCKLE, kok'l, _n._ the fire-chamber of an air-stove.

COCKNEY, kok'ne, _n._ (_Shak._) an affected, effeminate person, knowing the
manners of the town, but a stranger to what every child else knows: a
townsman as opposed to a countryman: one born in London, but strictly in a
particular part of London.--_ns._ COCK'NEYDOM, the domain of Cockneys;
COCKNEYFIC[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ COCK'NEYFY, to make Cockney.--_adj._
COCK'NEYISH.--_n._ COCK'NEYISM, the dialect or manners of a Cockney.--THE
COCKNEY SCHOOL, a school of writers belonging to London, who flourished in
the first half of the nineteenth century. [M. E. _coken-ey_, prob. lit.
'cock's egg;' cf. Fr. _coco_, an egg, a darling, a chap. Others would
connect with Fr. _coquin_, a rogue--L. _coquus_, a cook.]

COCO, COCOA, k[=o]'k[=o], _n._ a palm-tree growing in tropical countries,
and producing the coco-nut.--_ns._ C[=O]'CO-NUT, C[=O]'COA-NUT, the
well-known fruit of the coco-palm: (_slang_) a man's head. [Port. and Sp.
_coco_, a bugbear; applied to the nut from the three marks at the end of
it, which form a grotesque face.]

COCOA, k[=o]'k[=o], _n._ the seed of the cacao or chocolate tree: a
beverage made from the seeds crushed and ground. [A corr. of CACAO.]

COCOON, ko-k[=oo]n', _n._ the silken sheath spun by the larvæ of many
insects in passing into the pupa or resting stage.--_n._ COCOON'ERY, a
place for keeping silkworms when feeding and spinning cocoons. [Fr.
_cocon_, from _coque_, a shell--L. _concha_, a shell.]

COCTION, kok'shun, _n._ the act of boiling or cooking.--_adj._ COC'TILE,
baked: hardened by fire, as a brick. [L. _coqu[)e]re_, _coctum_, to boil,
to cook.]

COD, kod, CODFISH, kod'fish, _n._ a species of fish much used as food,
found in the northern seas.--_ns._ COD'-FISHER; COD'-FISH'ERY;
COD'-FISH'ING; COD'LING, a small cod.--COD-LIVER OIL, a medicinal oil
extracted from the fresh liver of the common cod. [Ety. dub.]

COD, kod, _n._ a husk or shell containing seeds: the scrotum.--_adjs._
COD'DED, enclosed in a cod; COD'DING (_Shak._), wanton.--_n._ COD'-PIECE, a
baggy appendage worn in front of the tight hose of the middle ages. [A.S.
_codd_, a small bag.]

COD, kod, _n._ (_Scot._), a pillow. [Old Dan. _kodde_, Ice. _koddi_, a
pillow.]

COD, kod, _n._ (_slang_) applied to persons, with various meanings: a
joke.--_v.t._ to impose on. [Ety. dub.; conn. with CODGER.]

CODDLE, kod'l, _v.t._ to pamper: to fondle: to parboil.--_n._ an effeminate
person. [Ety. dub.]

CODE, k[=o]d, _n._ a collection or digest of laws: a system of rules and
regulations: a system of signs used in the army.--_ns._ CODIFIC[=A]'TION;
CODI'F[=I]ER, COD'IST, one who codifies.--_v.t._ COD'IFY, to put into the
form of a code: to digest: to systematise:--_pr.p._ cod'ifying; _pa.p._
cod'ified.--CODE TELEGRAM, a telegram whose text in itself has no meaning,
but where the words are merely arbitrary symbols for other words known to
the receiver.--THE CODE, esp. the rules and regulations regarding
government schools and teachers. [Fr. _code_--L. _codex_.]

CODEX, k[=o]'deks, _n._ a code: a manuscript volume:--_pl._ CODICES
(kod'i-s[=e]z). [L. _codex_ or _caudex_, the trunk of a tree, a set of
tablets, a book.]

CODGER, koj'[.e]r, _n._ a mean fellow: an old person: a chap. [Prob. a
variant of CADGER.]

CODICIL, kod'i-sil, _n._ a short writing or note added as a supplement to a
will.--_adj._ CODICILL'ARY. [L. _codicillus_, dim. of _codex_.]

CODILLA, k[=o]-dil'a, _n._ the coarsest part of hemp or flax, sorted out
and separated from the rest. [Dim. of It. _coda_--L. _cauda_, a tail.]

CODILLE, k[=o]-dil, _n._ a term at ombre when the player gets fewer tricks
than one of his opponents. [Fr.]

CODLING, kod'ling, CODLIN, kod'lin, _n._ a variety of apple.--_n._
COD'LIN-MOTH, the moth whose larvæ cause the 'worm-eaten' apples which fall
prematurely off. [Ety. dub.]

COEFFICIENT, k[=o]-ef-fish'ent, _n._ that which acts together with another
thing: (_math._) the numerical or literal factor prefixed to an unknown
quantity in any algebraic term.--_n._ COEFFI'CIENCY.--_adv._
COEFFI'CIENTLY.

COEHORN, COHORN, k[=o]'horn, _n._ a small mortar for throwing grenades.
[From Baron van _Coehoorn_ (1641-1704).]

COELENTERATA, s[=e]-len-ter-[=a]'ta, _n._ the technical name for the second
lowest alliance of many-celled animals--radially symmetrical, without any
body-cavity distinct from the alimentary tube.--_adj._ COELEN'TER[=A]TE.
[Gr. _koilos_, hollow, and _enteron_, intestine.]

COELIAC, s[=e]'li-ak, _adj._ relating to the belly. [L. _coeliacus_--Gr.
_koilia_, the belly.]

COEMPTION, ko-emp'shun, _n._ the purchasing of the whole of a commodity: in
Roman law, a mode of marriage under the fiction of a mutual sale. [CO-, and
L. _em[)e]re_, to buy.]

COENESTHESIS, s[=e]-nes-th[=e]'sis, _n._ the general bodily consciousness.
[Gr. _koinos_, common, _aisth[=e]sis_, perception.]

COENOBITE, CENOBITE, sen'o-b[=i]t, _n._ a monk who lives along with others
of a like mind with himself, in contradistinction to anchorites or
hermits.--_adjs._ COENOBIT'IC, -AL; CENOBIT'IC, -AL.--_ns._ COEN'OBITISM,
CEN'OBITISM; COEN[=O]'BIUM, a religious community. [Gr.
_koinobion_--_koinos_, common, and _bios_, life.]

COEQUAL, ko-[=e]'kwal, _adj._ equal with another person or thing: of the
same rank or dignity.--_n._ one of the same rank.--_n._
COEQUAL'ITY.--_adv._ CO[=E]'QUALLY.

COERCE, k[=o]-[.e]rs', _v.t._ to restrain by force: to compel.--_adj._
COER'CIBLE.--_adv._ COER'CIBLY.--_ns._ COER'CION, restraint: government by
force; COER'CIONIST.--_adj._ COER'CIVE, having power to coerce:
compelling.--_adv._ COER'CIVELY.--_n._ COER'CIVENESS. [L.
_coerc[=e]re_--_co-_, together, _arc[=e]re_, to shut in.]

CO-ESSENTIAL, k[=o]-es-sen'shal, _adj._ partaking of the same
essence.--_n._ CO-ESSENTIAL'ITY.

COETANEOUS, k[=o]-[=e]-t[=a]n'e-us, _adj._ of the same age: contemporary.
[CO-, and L. _ætas_, _ætatis_, age.]

CO-ETERNAL, k[=o]-[=e]-t[.e]r'nal, _adj._ equally eternal with
another.--_adv._ CO-ETER'NALLY.--_n._ CO-ETER'NITY.

COEVAL, k[=o]-[=e]'val, _adj._ of the same age.--_n._ one of the same age:
a contemporary. [L. _coævus_, _co-_, together, and _ævum_, age.]

CO-EXIST, k[=o]-egz-ist', _v.i._ to exist at the same time.--_n._
CO-EXIST'ENCE.--_adj._ CO-EXIST'ENT.

CO-EXTEND, k[=o]-eks-tend', _v.i._ to extend equally with.--_n._
CO-EXTEN'SION.--_adj._ CO-EXTEN'SIVE.

COFF, kof, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to buy.--_pa.p._ COFT.

COFFEE, kof'[=e], _n._ a drink made from the seeds of the coffee-tree, a
native of Arabia: the powder made by roasting and grinding the
seeds.--_ns._ COFF'EE-BEAN, the seed of the coffee-plant; COFF'EE-BERR'Y,
the fruit of the coffee-tree; COFF'EE-BUG, the _Lecanium coffeæ_,
destructive to the coffee-plant; COFF'EE-CUP, a cup for coffee;
COFF'EE-HOUSE, a house where coffee and other refreshments are sold;
COFF'EE-MILL, a small mill or machine for grinding coffee-beans;
COFF'EE-POT, a pot or vessel in which coffee is prepared and served;
COFF'EE-ROOM, a room in a hotel where coffee and other refreshments are
served. [Turk. _qahveh_--Ar. _qahwah_, orig. meaning wine.]

COFFER, kof'[.e]r, _n._ a chest for holding money or treasure: (_pl._) the
whole wealth of a person: a deep panel in a ceiling.--_v.t._ to hoard
up.--_n._ COFF'ERDAM, a water-tight structure used in engineering for
excluding the water from the foundations of bridges, quay walls, &c., so as
to allow of their being built dry.--_adj._ COFF'ERED. [O. Fr. _cofre_, a
chest--L. _cophinus_, a basket--Gr. _kophinos_.]

COFFIN, kof'in, _n._ the coffer or chest in which a dead body is
enclosed.--_v.t._ to place within a coffin.--_n._ COFF'IN-SHIP, a ship that
is unsound, and likely to prove fatal to those in it.--DRIVE A NAIL IN
ONE'S COFFIN, to do something tending to hasten death or ruin. [O. Fr.
_cofin_--L. _cophinus_--Gr. _kophinos_.]

COFFLE, kof'l, _n._ a gang, esp. of slaves. [Ar. _q[=a]filah_, a caravan.]

COG, kog, _v.t._ to cheat or deceive: to wheedle: to cog dice is to
manipulate them so that they may fall in a given way.--_n._ the act of
cheating: deception.--_p.adj._ COG'GING, cheating. [No doubt from the
succeeding word.]

COG, kog, _n._ a catch or tooth on a wheel.--_v.t._ to fix teeth in the rim
of a wheel: to stop a wheel by putting a block before it:--_pr.p._
cog'ging; _pa.p._ cogged.--_n._ COG'-WHEEL, a toothed wheel, whose teeth
fit into and move another. [M. E. _cogge_; ety. dub.; cf. Sw. _kugge_.]

COG, kog, _n._ formerly a large ship of burden or for war: a small boat: a
cock-boat. [M. E. _cogge_, perh. from O. Fr. _cogue_, a ship. Cf. Dan.
_kogge_, _kog_; Ice. _kuggi_.]

COGENT, k[=o]'jent, _adj._ powerful: convincing.--_ns._ C[=O]'GENCE,
C[=O]'GENCY, convincing power.--_adv._ C[=O]'GENTLY. [L. _cog[)e]re_,
_co-_, together, _ag[)e]re_, to drive.]

COGGIE, COGIE, kog'i, _n._ (_Scot._) a small wooden bowl.--Also COG. [Dim.
of COGUE (q.v.).]

COGGLE, kog'gl, _v.i._ to be unsteady.--_n._ a cobble, a round
stone.--_adv._ COG'GLY (_Scot._), shaky. [Cf. Ger. _kugel_, and Dut.
_kogel_.]

COGITATE, koj'i-t[=a]t, _v.i._ to turn a thing over in one's mind: to
meditate: to ponder.--_adj._ COG'ITABLE, capable of being thought.--_n._
COGIT[=A]'TION, deep thought: meditation.--_adj._ COG'IT[=A]TIVE, having
the power of thinking: given to cogitating. [L. _cogit[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_,
to think deeply, _co-_, together, and _agit[=a]re_, to put a thing in
motion.]

COGNAC, k[=o]'nyak, _n._ an excellent quality of French brandy, so called
because much of it is made near the town _Cognac_, in Charente.

COGNATE, kog'n[=a]t, _adj._ of the same family, kind, or nature: related or
allied to.--_n._ one related by blood, a kinsman: a person related to
another through the mother, as distinguished from an _agnate_, one related
through the father.--_n._ COGN[=A]'TION. [L. _cognatus_--_co-_, together,
_(g)nasci_, _(g)natus_, to be born.]

COGNITION, kog-nish'un, _n._ certain knowledge: apprehension.--_adj._
COG'NISABLE, that may be known or understood: that may be judicially
investigated.--_adv._ COG'NISABLY.--_ns._ COG'NISANCE, COG'NIZANCE,
knowledge or notice, judicial or private: observation: jurisdiction: that
by which one is known, a badge.--_adj._ COG'NISANT, having cognisance or
knowledge of.--_v.t._ COG'NISE, to become conscious of.--_adj._ COG'NITIVE,
capable of, or pertaining to, cognition.--HAVE COGNISANCE OF, to have
knowledge of. [L., from _cognosc[)e]re_, _cognitum_--_co-_, together, and
_nosc[)e]re_, _gnosc[)e]re_, to know.]

COGNOMEN, kog-n[=o]'men, _n._ a surname: a nickname: a name: the last of
the three names of an individual among the Romans, indicating the house or
family to which he belonged.--_adj._ COGNOM'INAL, like-named: relating to a
cognomen.--_v.t._ COGNOM'INATE, to name.--_n._ COGNOMIN[=A]'TION.
[L.,--_co-_, together, _nomen_, _gnomen_, a name--_nosc[)e]re_,
_gnosc[)e]re_, to know.]

COGNOSCE, kog-nos', _v.t._ (_Scots law_) to examine: to give judgment: to
declare to be an idiot.--_adj._ COGNOS'CIBLE. [L. _cognosc[)e]re_--_co-_,
together, and _nosc[)e]re_, to know.]

COGNOSCENTE, ko-nyo-shent'e, _n._ one professing a critical knowledge of
works of art, and of a somewhat more pretentious character than
amateurs:--_pl._ COGNOSCENTI (ko-nyo-shent'[=e]). [It.,--L.
_cognosc[)e]re_.]

COGNOVIT, kog-n[=o]'vit, _n._ (_law_) an acknowledgment by the defendant in
an action that the plaintiff's cause is just. [L. _cognovit actionem_, he
has confessed the action.]

COGUE, COG, k[=o]g, _n._ (_Scot._) a round wooden vessel for holding milk.
[Ety. dub.]

COHABIT, k[=o]-hab'it, _v.i._ to dwell together as husband and wife, often
of persons not married.--_ns._ COHAB'ITANT, one dwelling with others;
COHABIT[=A]'TION. [L. _cohabit[=a]re_--_co-_, together, _habit[=a]re_, to
dwell.]

CO-HEIR, k[=o]-[=a]r', _n._ a joint heir:--_fem._ CO-HEIR'ESS.

COHERE, k[=o]-h[=e]r', _v.i._ to stick together: to follow in proper
connection: to be consistent.--_ns._ COHER'ENCE, a sticking together: a
consistent connection between several parts: congruity; COHER'ENCY.--_adj._
COHER'ENT, sticking together: connected: consistent in thought or
speech.--_adv._ COHER'ENTLY.--_n._ COHER'ER, an apparatus for the reception
of the waves in 'wireless' telegraphy.--_adj._ COH[=E]'SIBLE, capable of
cohesion.--_n._ COH[=E]'SION, the act of sticking together: a form of
attraction by which particles of bodies stick together: logical
connection.--_adj._ COH[=E]'SIVE, having the power of cohering: tending to
unite into a mass.--_adv._ COH[=E]'SIVELY.--_ns._ COH[=E]'SIVENESS,
COHESIBIL'ITY. [L. _cohær[=e]re_, _cohæsum_, _co-_, together, and
_hær[=e]re_, to stick.]

COHORT, k[=o]'hort, _n._ among the Romans, a body of soldiers from 300 to
600 in number, forming a tenth part of a legion: a band of armed men: any
band of men. [Fr.,--L. _cohors_, an enclosed place, a multitude enclosed, a
company of soldiers.]

COHORTATIVE, k[=o]-hor'ta-tiv, _adj._ encouraging.--_n._ in Heb. grammar, a
lengthened form of the imperfect--also _Paragogic future_. [See PARAGOGE.]

COIF, koif, _n._ a covering for the head, esp. the close-fitting cap of
white lawn or silk originally worn by serjeants-at-law: a covering for the
head worn by women.--_v.t._ to provide with a coif: to dress (the
hair).--_ns._ COIFF'EUR, a hairdresser; COIFF'URE, a head-dress. [Fr.
_coiffe_--Low L. _cofia_, a cap, perh. Old High Ger. _chuppha_, a cap, Ger.
_kopf_.]

COIGN, koin, _n._ a corner or external angle: a corner-stone: a
wedge.--COIGN OF VANTAGE, a position of advantage, either for seeing or
acting. [COIN.]

COIL, koil, _v.t._ to wind in rings as a rope, a serpent, &c.: to twist: to
entangle.--_v.i._ to twist one's self.--_n._ a rope which has been gathered
into rings: one of the rings into which a rope is gathered: a wire wound
spirally to conduct electricity.--COIL UP, of a serpent, to get into a
position for springing: to gather into a ball. [O. Fr. _coillir_ (Fr.
_cueillir_)--L. _collig[)e]re_--_col_, together, _leg[)e]re_, to gather.]

COIL, koil, _n._ tumult: hubbub: noise: fuss.--MORTAL COIL, the toil and
trouble of human life. [Der. unknown; prob. Celt.; Gael. and Ir. _goill_,
war.]

COIN, koin, _n._ (_Shak._) a corner-stone: a piece of metal legally stamped
and current as money.--_v.t._ to convert a piece of metal into money: to
stamp; to make, invent, fabricate: (_fig._) to make into.--_ns._ COIN'AGE,
the act of coining money: the currency: the pieces of metal coined: the
invention, or fabrication, of something new: what is invented; COIN'ER, one
who coins money: a maker of counterfeit coins: an inventor; COIN'ING,
minting: invention.--COIN MONEY, to make money rapidly.--PAY A MAN IN HIS
OWN COIN, to give tit for tat: to give as good as one got. [Fr. _coin_, a
wedge, also the die to stamp money--L. _cuneus_, a wedge.]

COINCIDE, k[=o]-in-s[=i]d', _v.i._ to fall in with, or agree, in opinion:
to correspond: to be identical.--_ns._ COIN'CIDENCE, act or condition of
coinciding: the occurrence of an event at the same time as another event,
without any apparent connection; COIN'CIDENCY.--_adjs._ COIN'CIDENT,
COINCIDENT'AL.--_adv._ COIN'CIDENTLY. [L. _co-_, together,
_incid[)e]re_--_in_, in, _cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

CO-INHERE, k[=o]-in-h[=e]r', _v.i._ to inhere together.--_n._
CO-INHER'ENCE.

CO-INHERITOR, k[=o]-in-her'it-or, _n._ a joint heir.--_n._ CO-INHER'ITANCE.

CO-INSTANTANEOUS, k[=o]-in-stan-t[=a]n'e-us, _adj._ exactly
simultaneous.--_ns._ CO-INSTANTAN[=E]'ITY, CO-INSTANTAN'EOUSNESS.--_adv._
CO-INSTANTAN'EOUSLY.

COIR, koir, _n._ the strong fibre of the husk of the coco-nut, used for
making door-mats. [Malay, _k[=a]yar_, cord--_k[=a]yaru_, to be twisted.]

COISTRIL, kois'tril, _n._ a groom: (_Shak._) a knave. [See CUSTREL.]

COITION, k[=o]-ish'un, _n._ sexual intercourse. [L. _coitio_--_co-_,
together, _[=i]re_, _[=i]tum_, to go.]

COJOIN, k[=o]-join', _v.t._ (_Shak._). Same as CONJOIN.

COKE, k[=o]k, _n._ a form of fuel obtained by the heating of coal in
confined spaces whereby its more volatile constituents are driven
off.--_v.t._ to make into coke. [Ety. dub.; not before 17th century.]

COL, kol, _n._ (_geog._) a depression or pass in a mountain-range.
[Fr.,--L. _collum_, a neck.]

COLANDER, CULLENDER, kul'end-[.e]r, _n._ a vessel having small holes in the
bottom, used as a strainer in cookery.--_ns._ COL[=A]'TION, COL'ATURE,
straining. [L. _col[=a]re_, to strain--_colum_, a strainer.]

COLBERTINE, kol'ber-tin, _n._ a kind of lace, so called after Jean Baptiste
_Colbert_ (1619-83), Minister of Finance to Louis XIV., a great patron of
the arts.

COLCANNON, kol-kan'on, _n._ an Irish dish, being a stew of pounded cabbage
and potatoes with butter. [COLE, cabbage; _cannon_ unknown.]

COLCHICUM, kol'chi-kum, _n._ a genus of _Liliaceæ_--the meadow saffron, its
corm or seed used for gout and rheumatism. [L.,--Gr. _colchicon_, meadow
saffron--_Colchicus_, relating to _Colchis_, the native country of the
sorceress Medea.]

COLCOTHAR, kol'k[=o]-thar, _n._ a dark-red iron peroxide formed by
calcining copperas.

COLD, k[=o]ld, _adj._ the opposite of hot: shivering: without passion or
zeal: spiritless: unfriendly: indifferent: reserved.--_n._ a relative want
of sensible heat: the feeling or sensation caused by the absence of heat:
coldness: a spell of cold weather: a disease caused by cold, a catarrhal
inflammation of the mucous membrane of the respiratory organs, usually
accompanied by hoarseness and coughing: catarrh: chillness.--_adj._
COLD'-BLOOD'ED, having cold blood, as fishes: without feeling:
hard-hearted--of persons or actions.--_adv._ COLD'-BLOOD'EDLY.--_ns._
COLD'-BLOOD'EDNESS; COLD'-CHIS'EL, a strong and finely-tempered chisel for
cutting cold metal, as distinguished from a blacksmith's chisel for cutting
hot iron; COLD'-CREAM, the name applied to a creamy ointment, usually made
of almond-oil, spermaceti, white wax, and rose-water, used as a cooling
dressing for the skin.--_adjs._ COLD'-HEART'ED, wanting feeling:
indifferent; COLD'ISH, somewhat cold.--_adv._ COLDLY.--_ns._ COLD'NESS;
COLD'-PIG (_coll._), the application of cold water to wake a
person.--_adj._ COLD'-SHORT, brittle when cold: (_fig._) of the
temper.--_ns._ COLD'-WAT'ER, water at its natural temperature;
COLD'-WITHOUT', brandy with cold water and no sugar.--COLD AS CHARITY, a
proverbial phrase expressing ironically great coldness or
indifference.--CATCH COLD, TAKE COLD, to acquire the malady--a cold.--GIVE
THE COLD SHOULDER, to show indifference: to give a rebuff.--IN COLD BLOOD,
with deliberate intent, not under the influence of passion.--LEAVE OUT IN
THE COLD, to neglect, ignore.--THROW COLD WATER ON, to discourage. [A.S.
_ceald_; Scot, _cauld_, Ger. _kalt_; cog. also with Eng. _cool_, Ice.
_kala_, to freeze, L. _gelidus_--_gelu_, frost.]

COLE, k[=o]l, _n._ a general name for all sorts of cabbage.--_ns._
COLE'-GARTH, a cabbage garden; COLE'-SEED, the seed of rape; COLE'-WORT, a
species of cabbage. [A.S. _cáwel_; Ger. _kohl_, Scot. _kail_; all from L.
_colis_, _caulis_, a stem, esp. of cabbage; cf. Gr. _kaulos_.]

COLEOPTERA, kol-e-op't[.e]r-a, _n.pl._ an order of insects having two pairs
of wings, the outer pair being hard or horny, serving as wing-cases for the
true wings: the beetles.--_adjs._ COLEOP'TERAL, COLEOP'TEROUS.--_n._
COLEOP'TERIST. [Gr. _koleos_, a sheath, and _pteron_ (pl. _ptera_), a
wing.]

COLEORHIZA, kol-[=e]-[=o]-r[=i]'za, _n._ the root-sheath in endogens. [Gr.
_koleos_, sheath, _rhiza_, root.]

COLIBRI, kol'ib-r[=e], _n._ a kind of humming-bird. [Sp. and Fr. _colibri_,
said to be the Carib. name.]

COLIC, kol'ik, _n._ a disease attended with severe pain and flatulent
distension of the abdomen, without diarrhoea.--_adj._ COL'ICKY, suffering
or causing colic.--_n._ COL[=I]'TIS (see COLONITIS under COLON).
[Fr.,--L.,--Gr. _kolikos_--_kolon_, the large intestine.]

COLIN, kol'in, the American quail or partridge. [Ety. dub.]

COLISEUM. See COLOSSEUM.

COLL, kol, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to embrace or fondle by taking round the
neck.--_n._ COLL'ING, embracing. [Fr. _col_--L. _collum_, the neck.]

COLLABORATOR, kol-ab'[=o]-r[=a]-tor, COLLABORATEUR, kol-ab'[=o]-ra-t[=a]r,
_n._ an associate or assistant in labour, particularly literary or
scientific.--_n._ COLLABOR[=A]'TION. [Coined from L. _col_, with, and
_labor[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to labour.]

COLLAPSE, kol-aps', _n._ a falling away or breaking down: any sudden or
complete breakdown or prostration.--_v.i._ to fall together, to contract:
to fall or break down: to go to ruin: to lose heart.--_adj._ COLLAPS'IBLE,
capable of collapsing. [L. _collapsus_--_col_, together, and _labi_,
_lapsus_, to slide or fall.]

COLLAR, kol'ar, _n._ something worn round the neck: the part of a garment
at the neck: a band round a dog's neck: that part of a horse's harness worn
round the neck, to which the traces are attached: a ring: a band.--_v.t._
to seize by the collar: to put a collar on: to capture.--_ns._
COLL'AR-BEAM, a horizontal piece of timber connecting or bracing two
opposite rafters, to prevent sagging; COLL'AR-BONE, in man and most mammals
the only bone directly connecting the upper extremity with the skeleton of
the trunk.--_p.adj._ COLL'ARED, having, or ornamented with, a collar:
rolled up and bound with a string, as a piece of meat having the bones
removed: captured.--_ns._ COLL'ARETTE, a small collar; COLL'AR-WORK, hard
work against the collar: drudgery. [O. Fr. _colier_--L.
_coll[=a]re_--_collum_, the neck.]

COLLARD, kol'ard, _n._ cole-wort. [See COLE.]

COLLATE, kol-[=a]t', _v.t._ to bring together for comparison: to examine
and compare, as books, and esp. old manuscripts: to place in or confer a
benefice upon: to place in order, as the sheets of a book for
binding.--_adj._ COLL[=A]'TABLE.--_ns._ COLL[=A]'TION, act of collating: a
bringing together for examination and comparison: presentation to a
benefice: a repast between meals, from the habit of reading the
_collationes_ or lives of the Fathers during meals in monasteries.--_adj._
COLL[=A]'TIVE, having the power of conferring: of livings where the bishop
and patron are one and the same person.--_n._ COLL[=A]'TOR, one who
collates or compares: one who bestows or presents. [L. _conferre_,
_collatum_--_con_, together, _ferre_, to bring.]

COLLATERAL, kol-at'[.e]r-al, _adj._ side by side: running parallel or
together; corresponding; descended from the same ancestor, but not
directly, as the children of brothers.--_n._ a collateral relation: a
contemporary: a rival.--_adv._ COLLAT'ERALLY. [L. _col_, and _latus_,
_lateris_, a side.]

COLLEAGUE, kol'[=e]g, _n._ one associated with others in some
employment--not of partners in business.--_n._ COLL'EAGUESHIP. [Fr.
_collègue_--L. _collega_--_col_, together, and _leg[)e]re_, to choose.]

COLLEAGUE, kol'[=e]g, _v.i._ to join or unite: to conspire:--_pr.p._
colleaguing (kol-[=e]g'ing); _pa.p._ colleagued (kol-[=e]gd'). [From O. Fr.
_colliguer_, to join in alliance--L. _collig[=a]re_, to bind together.]

COLLECT, kol-ekt', _v.t._ to assemble or bring together: to infer: to put
one's thoughts in order.--_v.i._ to run together: to accumulate.--_ns._
COL'LECT, a short form of prayer, peculiar to the liturgies of the Western
Church, consisting of a single sentence, conveying one main petition;
COLLECT[=A]'NEA, a selection of passages from various authors: a
miscellany.--_adj._ COLLECT'ED, gathered together: having one's senses
gathered together: cool: firm--_adv._ COLLECT'EDLY.--_ns._ COLLECT'EDNESS,
self-possession: coolness; COLLEC'TION, act of collecting: collecting of
money at a religious or public meeting: the money collected: a number of
anything: an assemblage: a book of selections: composure: an examination at
the end of the terms in certain colleges.--_adj._ COLLECT'IVE, considered
as forming one mass or sum: congregated: common: (_Milt._) inferential:
(_gram._) expressing a number or multitude.--_adv._ COLLECT'IVELY.--_ns._
COLLECT'IVISM, the economic theory of socialism, that industry should be
carried on with a collective capital; COLLECT'IVIST, a socialist--also
_adj._; COLLECT'OR, one who collects, as tickets, money, &c.;
COLLECT'ORATE, COLLECT'ORSHIP. [L. _collig[)e]re_, _collectum_, from _col_,
together, and _leg[)e]re_, to gather.]

COLLEEN, kol'[=e]n, _n._ a girl. [Irish _cailín_.]

COLLEGE, kol'ej, _n._ an incorporation, company, or society of persons
joined together generally for literary or scientific purposes, and often
possessing peculiar or exclusive privileges: a member of the body known as
the university: (_U.S._) often used as the equivalent of university: a
seminary of learning: a literary, political, or religious institution: the
edifice appropriated to a college.--_n._ COLL'EGER, inmate of a college:
one of the seventy foundationers at Eton College.--_adj._ COLL[=E]'GIAL,
pertaining to a college.--_ns._ COLL[=E]'GIAN, a member or inhabitant of a
college: (_slang_) inmate of a prison; COLL[=E]'GIANER, a member of a
college, a student.--_adj._ COLL[=E]'GIATE, pertaining to or resembling a
college: containing a college, as a town; instituted like a college:
corporate.--_n._ inmate of a prison, &c.--COLLEGE OF ARMS, HERALDS'
COLLEGE, a collegiate body incorporated in 1483, presided over by the Earl
Marshal, and including Garter, principal King-of-arms, Clarenceux, and
Norroy, besides six heralds and four pursuivants: COLLEGE OF JUSTICE, in
Scotland, a great forensic society, composed of judges, advocates, writers
to the signet, and solicitors.--COLLEGIATE CHURCH, COLLEGIAL CHURCH, a
church so called from having a college or chapter, consisting of a dean or
provost and canons, attached to it (in Scotland, a church occupied by two
or more pastors of equal rank--also COLLEGIATE CHARGE). [Fr. _collège_--L.
_collegium_, from _col_, and _leg[)e]re_, to gather.]

COLLET, kol'et, _n._ a ring or collar: the part of a ring which contains
the stone. [Fr.,--L. _collum_.]

COLLIDE, kol-[=i]d', _v.i._ to dash together: to clash.--_p.adjs._
COLLID'ED, COLLID'ING.--_ns._ COLLI'SION, state of being struck together:
conflict: opposition: clashing; COLLI'SION-MAT; a mat for covering a hole
in a ship's side caused by a collision. [L. _collid[)e]re_,
_collisum_--_col_, together, _læd[)e]re_, to strike.]

COLLIE, COLLY, kol'i, _n._ a shepherd's dog. [Ety. dub.]

COLLIER, kol'y[.e]r, _n._ one who works in a coal-mine: a ship that carries
coal: a sailor in such a ship.--_n._ COLL'IERY, a coal-mine.

COLLIGATE, kol'i-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to bind together. [L. _collig[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_col_, together, _lig[=a]re_, to bind.]

COLLIMATION, kol-li-m[=a]'shun, _n._ the adjustment of the line of sight of
a telescope.--_v.t._ COL'LIM[=A]TE.--_n._ COLLIM[=A]'TOR, a subsidiary
telescope used to detect errors in collimation, when adjusting for transit
observations. [L. _collim[=a]re_ for _colline[=a]re_, to bring into line
with--_col_, together, _linea_, a line.]

COLLINEAR, ko-lin'e-ar, _adj._ in the same straight line.

COLLIESHANGIE, kol-i-shang'i, _n._ (_Scot._) noisy wrangling or fighting.
[Ety. dub.; but perh. from _collie_, a dog, and _shangie_, something
attached to his tail.]

COLLINGUAL, ko-ling'gwal, _adj._ speaking the same tongue.

COLLIQUATE, kol'i-kw[=a]t, _v.t._ to melt.--_adjs._ COLLIQ'UABLE,
COLL'IQUANT, melting, wasting; COLLIQ'UATIVE, profuse in flow. [L. _com-_,
together, _liqu[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to make melt.]

COLLOCATE, kol'[=o]-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to place together: to set: to
arrange.--_n._ COLLOC[=A]'TION, act of collocating: disposition in place:
arrangement. [L. _colloc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, _col_, together, _loc[=a]re_,
to place.]

COLLOCUTOR, COLLOCUTORY. See COLLOQUY.

COLLODION, kol-[=o]'di-on, _n._ a gluey solution of gun-cotton in alcohol
and ether, used in surgery and photography. [Gr. _koll[=o]d[=e]s_--_kolla_,
glue, _eidos_, form, appearance.]

COLLOGUE, ko-log', _v.i._ to simulate belief: to conspire: to converse
confidentially.--_v.t._ to coax; to flatter. [Prob. from L. _colloqui_, to
speak together.]

COLLOID, kol'oid, _n._ a name given by Graham, in contradistinction to
_crystalloids_, to any soluble substance, which, when exposed to dialysis,
does not pass through the porous membrane.--_adj._ COLLOID'AL. [Gr.
_kolla_, glue, and _eidos_, form.]

COLLOP, kol'op, _n._ a slice of meat, fried or otherwise: (_Shak._) a
child.--COLLOP MONDAY, the day before Shrove Tuesday, when collops-and-eggs
was eaten.--MINCED COLLOPS (_Scot._), minced meat.

COLLOQUY, kol'o-kwi, _n._ a speaking together: mutual discourse:
conversation.--_v.i._ (_rare_) to converse.--_n._ COLLOC'[=U]TOR.--_adj._
COLLOC'[=U]TORY.--_v.i._ COLLOQUE', to hold colloquy.--_adj._
COLL[=O]'QUIAL, pertaining to or used in common conversation.--_ns._
COLL[=O]'QUIALISM, a form of expression used in familiar talk;
COLL[=O]'QUIALIST.--_adv._ COLL[=O]'QUIALLY.--_v.i._ COLL'OQUISE, to
converse.--_n._ COLL'OQUIST, a speaker in a colloquy. [L. _colloquium_,
_col_, together, _loqui_, to speak.]

COLLOTYPE, kol'o-t[=i]p, _n._ a photographic process much used for book
illustrations and advertising purposes. [Gr. _kolla_, glue, and TYPE.]

COLLUCTATION, kol-uk-t[=a]'shun, _n._ strife: opposition. [L.
_colluct[=a]ri_--_col-_, _luct[=a]ri_, to wrestle.]

COLLUDE, kol-[=u]d', _v.i._ to play into each other's hand: to act in
concert, esp. in a fraud.--_ns._ COLLUD'ER; COLL[=U]'SION, act of
colluding: a secret agreement to deceive: deceit.--_adj._ COLL[=U]'SIVE,
fraudulently concerted: deceitful.--_adv._ COLL[=U]'SIVELY. [L.
_collud[)e]re_, _collusum_, from _col_, and _lud[)e]re_, to play.]

COLLUVIES, ko-l[=u]'vi-[=e]s., _n._ filth: a rabble. [L.
'washings'--_collu[)e]re_, to wash thoroughly.]

COLLY, kol'li, _v.t._ to begrime with coal-dust: (_Shak._) to
darken.--_p.adj._ COL'LIED. [See COAL.]

COLLYRIUM, ko-lir'i-um, _n._ a term for various kinds of eye-salve or
eye-wash. [L.,--Gr. _kollyrion_, eye-salve, dim. of _kollyra_, a roll of
bread.]

COLOCYNTH, kol'[=o]-sinth, _n._ the dried and powdered pulp of a kind of
cucumber, much used as a purgative. [L.,--Gr. _kolokynthis_.]

COLOGNE-EARTH, ko-l[=o]n'-[.e]rth, _n._ a brown earth prepared from
lignite, found originally near _Cologne_, a German city on the
Rhine.--COLOGNE WATER, or EAU DE COLOGNE, a perfumed spirit first made at
Cologne in 1709 by Jean Farina.

COLON, k[=o]'lon, _n._ the mark (:) used to indicate a distinct member or
clause of a sentence. [Gr. _k[=o]lon_, a limb, member.]

COLON, k[=o]'lon, _n._ that portion of the large intestine which extends
from the cæcum to the rectum, which is the terminal portion of the
intestinal canal.--_n._ COLON[=I]'TIS, inflammation of the colon. [L.,--Gr.
_kolon_, the large intestine.]

COLONEL, kur'n[.e]l, _n._ an officer who has command of a regiment;--_ns._
COL'ONELCY, his office or rank; COL'ONELLING, playing the colonel;
COL'ONELSHIP, colonelcy: quality of a colonel. [Fr. and Sp. _coronel_; a
corr. of It. _colonello_, the leader of a _colonna_, or column--L.
_columna_.]

COLONNADE, kol-on-[=a]d', _n._ a range of columns placed at regular
intervals: a similar row, as of trees. [Fr.,--L. _columna_.]

COLONY, kol'on-i, _n._ a name somewhat vaguely applied to the foreign
dependencies of a state (a Roman colony was a military settlement planted
in subject territory; a Greek colony consisted of a band of emigrants
impelled to seek a new home, and connected with their mother-city by no
stronger tie than that of sentiment): a body of persons who form a fixed
settlement in another country: the settlement so formed: the place they
inhabit.--_adj._ COL[=O]N'IAL, pertaining to a colony.--_n._ an inhabitant
of a colony, a colonist.--_ns._ COL[=O]N'IALISM, a trait of colonial life
or speech; COLONIS[=A]'TION, act or practice of colonising: state of being
colonised.--_v.t._ COL'ONISE, to plant or establish a colony in: to form
into a colony.--_v.i._ to settle.--_n._ COL'ONIST, an inhabitant of a
colony.--COLONIAL ANIMALS, organisms which cannot be fairly regarded as
unities, but consist of numerous individuals united in a common life;
COLONIAL SYSTEM, the theory that the settlements abroad were to be treated
as proprietary domains exploited for the benefit of the mother-country. [L.
_colonia_--_colonus_, a husbandman--_col[)e]re_, to till.]

COLOPHON, kol'o-fon, _n._ in early printing, the inscription at the end of
a book with name, date, &c. [L. _colophon_--Gr. _koloph[=o]n_, the finish.]

COLOPHONY, kol-of'o-ni, _n._ the dark-coloured resin got from the
distillation of turpentine with water. [Gr., from _Colophon_, in Asia
Minor.]

COLOQUINTIDA, kol-o-kwin'ti-da, _n._ the colocynth.

COLOSSUS, kol-os'us, _n._ a gigantic statue, esp. that of Apollo astride
the entrance of the harbour of Rhodes.--_adjs._ COLOSS'AL, like a colossus:
gigantic; COLOSS'ALWISE, astride (_Shak._).--_ns._ COLOSS[=E]'UM,
COLIS[=E]'UM, Vespasian's amphitheatre at Rome, which was the largest in
the world. [L.,--Gr. _kolossos_.]

COLOSTRUM, ko-los'trum, _n._ the first milk of a mammal after
parturition.--_n._ COLOSTR[=A]'TION, a disease of infants due to
colostrum.--_adjs._ COLOS'TRIC, COLOS'TROUS. [L.]

COLOUR, kul'ur, _n._ a property of light which causes bodies to have
different appearances to the eye: the hue or appearance which bodies
present to the eye: appearance of blood in the face: appearance: pretext:
tint: paint: false show: kind: (_pl._) a flag, ensign, or standard:
paints.--_v.t._ to put colour on: to stain: to paint: to set in a fair
light: to exaggerate: to misrepresent.--_v.i._ to show colour: to
blush.--_adjs._ COLORIF'IC, containing or producing colours; COL'OURABLE,
having a fair appearance: designed to conceal.--_adv._ COL'OURABLY.--_n._
COLOUR[=A]'TION.--_adj._ COL'OUR-BLIND, unable to distinguish between
colours.--_n._ COL'OUR-BLIND'NESS.--_adjs._ COL'OURED, having colour:
(_Spens._) having a specious appearance, deceitful: of the complexion,
other than white.--_ns._ COL'OURING, any substance used to give colour:
manner of applying colours: specious appearance; COL'OURIST, one who
colours or paints: one who excels in colouring.--_adj._ COL'OURLESS,
without colour: transparent: neutral.--_ns._ COL'OURMAN, one who prepares
and sells colours; COL'OUR-SER'GEANT, the sergeant who guards the colours
of a regiment.--_adj._ COL'OURY, having much colour.--COLOUR A PIPE, to
cause a tobacco-pipe, esp. a meerschaum, to take on a brown or black
colour, by smoking.--A PERSON OF COLOUR, a person of negro blood.--CHANGE
COLOUR, to turn pale: to blush; COME OFF WITH FLYING COLOURS, to do
something with great éclat; COME OUT IN ONE'S TRUE COLOURS, to appear in
one's real character; DESERT ONE'S COLOURS, to abandon one's post or duty;
FAST COLOUR, a colour which does not fade when washed; FIGHT UNDER FALSE
COLOURS, to put forward a false pretence as a cover for one's actions; GIVE
COLOUR, to give plausibility: HANG OUT FALSE COLOURS, to put up another's
flag, to pretend to belong to another party than one really does; HIGH
COLOUR, pronounced redness of complexion; LOSE COLOUR, to lose one's good
looks; NAIL ONE'S COLOURS TO THE MAST, to commit one's self to some party
or plan of action; OFF COLOUR, faded: past one's best; PAINT IN BRIGHT
COLOURS, to embellish: to exaggerate; PRIMARY COLOURS, the three colours,
red, green, and violet, from which the others, called SECONDARY COLOURS,
can be obtained; SHOW ONE'S COLOURS, to show what are one's inclinations,
opinions, or character; STICK TO ONE'S COLOURS, to adhere to one's party or
opinions; UNDER COLOUR OF, under the pretext of; WITHOUT COLOUR, without
disguise: colourless: without individuality. [Fr.,--L. _color_; akin to
_cel[=a]re_, to cover, to conceal.]

COLPORTEUR, kol'p[=o]rt-[=a]r, or kol'p[=o]rt-[.e]r, _n._ a peddler, esp.
one selling tracts and religious books.--_n._ COL'PORT[=A]GE, the
distribution of books by colporteurs. [Fr. _colporteur_, from _col_--L.
_collum_, the neck, and _porter_--L. _port[=a]re_, to carry.]

COLT, k[=o]lt, _n._ a young horse: an awkward fellow: an inexperienced
youth: (_B._) a young camel or ass: (_naut._) a rope's end.--_v.i._
(_Spens._) to frisk like a colt.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to cheat: to give the
rope's end, to beat.--_adj._ COLT'ISH, like a colt: frisky: wanton.--_ns._
COLT'S'-FOOT, a composite plant with large soft leaves once used for asthma
and coughing; COLT'S'-TOOTH, one of a horse's first set of teeth; (_Shak._)
love of youthful pleasures: wantonness. [A.S. _colt_; Sw. _kult_, a young
boar, a stout boy.]

COLTER, COULTER, k[=o]lt[.e]r, _n._ the fore-iron of a plough. [A.S.
_culter_--L. _culter_, a knife.]

COLUBER, kol'ub-[.e]r, _n._ a genus of non-venomous snakes, of almost
world-wide distribution.--_n._ COLUB'RIAD (_Cowper_).--_adj._ COL'UBRINE.
[L. _coluber_, a snake.]

COLUMBIAN, k[=o]-lum'bi-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Columbia_, a name of
America.--_ns._ COLUM'BATE, a salt or compound of columbic acid with a
base; COLUM'BITE, the native ore of columbium; COLUM'BIUM, a metallic
element now called _niobium_. [_Columbia_, America, from Columbus
(1447-1506), its discoverer.]

COLUMBINE, kol'um-b[=i]n, _adj._ of or like a dove: dove-coloured.--_n._ a
genus of plants (_Aquilegia_) having five coloured sepals, which soon fall
off, and five petals, each terminating below in a horn-shaped spur or
nectary: in pantomimes, the sweetheart of Harlequin (q.v.).--_ns._
COLUMB[=A]'RIUM, a dovecot or pigeon-house: one of the niches or
pigeon-holes in a particular kind of sepulchral chamber in which the urns
containing the ashes of dead bodies burned were deposited; COL'UMBARY, a
pigeon-house or dovecot. [L. _columba_, a dove.]

COLUMEL, COLUMELLA. See COLUMN.

COLUMN, kol'um, _n._ a long, round body, used to support or adorn a
building: any upright body or mass like a column: a body of troops drawn up
in deep files: a perpendicular row of lines in a book.--_ns._ COL'[=U]MEL,
a small column; COL[=U]MEL'LA, the central axis of a spiral univalve; the
auditory ossicle of the amphibian ear: the central axis of the spore-case
of mosses: in the opening of fruits, what remains in the centre after the
carpels have split away.--_adjs._ COLUM'NAL, COLUM'NAR, formed in
columns.--_n._ COLUMNA'RITY.--_adjs._ COL'UMNED, COLUM'NI[=A]TED,
COLUM'NATED, having columns.--_n._ COLUM'NI[=A]TION. [L. _columen_,
_columna_, akin to _celsus_, high; Gr. _kol[=o]n[=e]_, a hill.]

COLURE, k[=o]-l[=u]r', _n._ (_astron._) one of two great circles supposed
to intersect each other at right angles in the poles of the equator. [Gr.
_kolourus_--_kolos_, docked, _oura_, tail.]

COLZA, kol'za, _n._ a kind of cabbage whose seeds yield oil for lamps.
[Dut. _koolzaad_, cabbage-seed.]

COMA, k[=o]'ma, _n._ deep sleep: stupor.--_adj._ COM'ATOSE, affected with
coma: drowsy. [Gr. _k[=o]ma_.]

COMA, k[=o]'ma, _n._ (_bot._) a tuft or bunch of hairy-like appendages as
on some seeds: the leafy branches forming the head of a tree: (_astron._)
the nebulous envelope surrounding the nucleus of a comet. [L.--Gr.
_kom[=e]_, hair of the head.]

COMARB, k[=o]'märb, _n._ the head of one of the families composing an old
Irish sept: the successor in an ecclesiastical office, abbot, vicar,
&c.--Better C[=O]'ARB. [Ir. _comharba_, successor.]

COMART, k[=o]'märt, _n._ (_Shak._) an agreement.

COMATE, k[=o]'m[=a]t, _n._ (_Shak._) a mate or companion.

COMB, k[=o]m, _n._ a toothed instrument for separating and cleaning hair,
wool, flax, &c.: the crest of a cock: the top or crest of a wave or of a
hill: an aggregation of cells for honey.--_v.t._ to separate, arrange, or
clean by means of a comb: to dress with a comb: (_Shak._) to beat.--_v.i._
to break with a white foam, as the top of a wave.--_adj._ COMBED.--_n._
COMB'ER, one who or that which combs wool, &c.--_n.pl._ COMB'INGS, hairs
combed off.--_adjs._ COMB'LESS (_Shak._), without a comb; COMB'WISE;
COMB'Y.--_n._ CROP'-COMB, a semicircular comb worn by girls.--COMB OFF, to
remove. [A.S. _camb_.]

COMB, COMBE. See COOMB.

COMBAT, kom'bat, or kum'bat, _v.i._ to contend or struggle.--_v.t._ to beat
against: to contest: to oppose: to debate.--_n._ a struggle: a
fight.--_adjs._ COM'BATABLE, capable of being combated; COM'BATANT,
disposed to combat.--_n._ one who combats; COM'BATIVE, inclined to
quarrel.--_n._ COM'BATIVENESS.--COMBATANT OFFICER, one who takes part in
the action, as opposed to the medical officers, &c., who are NON-COMBATANT.
[Fr. _combattre_, to fight--_com_, with, and _battre_, to beat. See BEAT.]

COMBER, kom'b[=e]r, _n._ a name applied to the gaper, a sea-perch, and to a
species of wrasse.

COMBINE, kom-b[=i]n', _v.t._ to join two together: to unite
intimately.--_v.i._ to come into close union: to co-operate: (_chem._) to
unite and form a new compound.--_n._ a trading syndicate, a trust.--_adj._
COM'BINATE, combined: betrothed.--_ns._ COMBIN[=A]'TION, the act of
combining: union of individual things: persons united for a purpose;
COMBIN[=A]'TION-ROOM, the college-parlour at Cambridge, for the fellows of
a college after dinner, a common-room.--_n.pl._ COMBIN[=A]'TIONS, a women's
and children's garment consisting of chemise and drawers combined.--_adjs._
COM'BIN[=A]TIVE; COMB[=I]'NATORY; COMBINED'; COMBIN'ING. [L.
_combin[=a]re_, to join--_com_, together, and _bini_, two and two.]

COMBROUS (_obs._) = CUM'BROUS.

COMBURGESS, kom-bur'jes, _n._ a fellow-burgess.

COMBUST, kom-bust', _adj._ burned by the sun: in conjunction with the sun,
or apparently very near it, so as to be obscured by its light, said of a
planet when it is not more than 8½° from the sun.--_n._ that which is
burned.--_v.t._ to burn up.--_adj._ COMBUST'IBLE, liable to take fire and
burn: excitable.--_n._ anything that will take fire and burn.--_ns._
COMBUST'IBLENESS, COMBUSTIBIL'ITY, quality of being combustible;
COMBUS'TION, a burning: the action of fire on combustible substances:
confusion, turmoil: the scientific term for all kinds of consumption
through the influence of heat.--_adjs._ COMBUST'IOUS (_Shak._),
combustible, inflammable: turbulent; COMBUST'IVE, disposed to take
fire.--SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION, burning caused by heat generated in the
substance itself. [L. _combur[)e]re_, _combustum_, to consume--_com_,
inten., _ur[)e]re_, to burn.]

COME, kum (_Shak._), a shortening of BECOME.

COME, kum, _v.i._ to move toward this place (the opposite of _go_): to draw
near: to arrive at a certain state or condition: to issue: to happen:
(_Shak._) to yield; to become: to turn out:--_pr.p._ com'ing; _pa.t._ came;
_pa.p._ come.--_n._ COM'ING.--_adj._ COME'-AT-ABLE, accessible; COME ABOUT,
to happen; COME ACROSS, to meet; COME AND GO, to have freedom of action
(_n._ passage to and fro); COME AT, to reach; COME BY, to come near: to
pass: to obtain; COME DOWN, to descend: to be reduced (_n._ a fall); COME
DOWN UPON, to be severe with; COME DOWN WITH, to pay down; COME HIGH, or
LOW, to cost much, or little; COME HOME, to return to one's house: to touch
one's interest or feelings closely (with _to_): (_naut._) to drag or slip
through the ground--of an anchor; COME IN, to enter: to give in, to yield:
(_fencing_) to get within the opponent's guard (_Shak._); COME IN FOR, to
have reason to expect or to have a share; COME IT STRONG (_coll._), to do
or say too much; COME OF, to descend from: become of; COME OFF, to come
away: to turn out: to escape (_n._ a conclusion: an evasion of duty); COME
OUT, to result: to be published: to become evident: to enter society; COME
OUT WITH, to let be known: to tell; COME OVER (_Shak._), surpass: to
befall: (_slang_) to overreach; COME O' WILL, something that comes of its
own accord: an illegitimate child; COME ROUND, to come by a circuitous
path: to happen in due course: to change: to recover from a faint; COME
SHORT, to fail; COME SHORT OF, to fail to accomplish; COME TO, to obtain:
to amount to: to recover consciousness or sanity; COME TO GRIEF, to meet
with disaster or ill-fortune; COME TO PASS, to happen; COME TRUE, to be
found to have been true; COME UNDER, to be included under; COME UPON, to
attack: to affect; to hold answerable: to meet; COME UP WITH, to overtake:
reach.--ALL COMERS, any one that likes. [A.S. _cuman_; Ger. _kommen_, to
come.]

CO-MEDDLE, k[=o]-med'l, _v.t._ to mix: (_Shak._) to temper.

COMEDO, kom'e-do, _n._ a small, black-tipped, worm-like mass which is found
on the face of some persons. [L. _comed[)e]re_, to eat up.]

COMEDY, kom'e-di, _n._ a dramatic piece of a pleasant or humorous
character, originally accompanied with dancing and singing.--_ns._
COM[=E]'DIAN, one who acts or writes comedies: an actor:--_fem._
COMÉDIENNE'; COM[=E]DIET'TA, a short comic piece. [L.,--Gr.
_k[=o]m[=o]dia_, _k[=o]mos_, revel, _[=o]d[=e]_, song.]

COMELY, kum'li, _adj._ pleasing: graceful: handsome.--_adv._ in a comely
manner.--_n._ COME'LINESS. [A.S. _cymlic_--_cyme_, suitable, _líc_, like.]

COMESTIBLES, kom-est'i-blz, _n.pl._ eatables. [Fr.,--L. _comed[)e]re_, to
eat up.]

COMET, kom'et, _n._ a heavenly body with an eccentric orbit, having a
definite point or nucleus, a nebulous light surrounding the nucleus, and a
luminous tail preceding or following the nucleus.--_adjs._ COM'ETARY,
COMET'IC.--_ns._ COM'ET-FIND'ER, a telescope of low power used to search
for comets; COMETOG'RAPHY; COMETOL'OGY. [Gr. _kom[=e]t[=e]s_,
long-haired--_kom[=e]_, the hair.]

COMFIT, kum'fit, _n._ a sweetmeat made of fruit and sugar, &c. [A doublet
of CONFECT; from Fr. _confit_, _confiture_--L. _confic[)e]re_, to make up.]

COMFORT, kum'furt, _v.t._ to relieve from pain or distress: to soothe: to
cheer, revive.--_n._ relief: encouragement: ease: quiet enjoyment: freedom
from annoyance: whatever gives ease, enjoyment, &c.: a subject of
satisfaction.--_adj._ COM'FORTABLE, imparting or enjoying comfort.--_adv._
COM'FORTABLY.--_n._ COM'FORTER, one who administers comfort: (_B._) the
Holy Spirit: a long, narrow woollen tippet.--_adj._ COM'FORTLESS, without
comfort.--_n._ COM'FORTLESSNESS.--JOB'S COMFORTER, one who, while
pretending to comfort, only aggravates the distress. [O. Fr.
_conforter_--L. _con_, and _fortis_, strong.]

COMFREY, kum'fri, _n._ a genus of _Boraginaceæ_, somewhat coarse perennial
herbs. [O. Fr. _confirie_.]

COMIC, kom'ik, _adj._ relating to comedy: raising mirth: droll.--_n._
(_coll._) an amusing person: (_coll._) a comic paper.--_adj._ COM'ICAL,
funny: queer: ludicrous.--_ns._ COMICAL'ITY, COM'ICALNESS.--_adv._
COM'ICALLY.--_n._ COMIQUE (k[=o]-m[=e]k'), a comic actor or singer. [See
COMEDY.]

COMITATUS, kom-i-t[=a]'tus, _n._ a prince's escort: a county or shire. [L.]

COMITIA, ko-mish'i-a, _n._ the assemblies of the Romans for electing
magistrates, passing laws, &c. [L.,--_com_, together, _[=i]re_, _[=i]tum_,
to go.]

COMITY, kom'i-ti, _n._ courteousness: civility.--COMITY OF NATIONS
(_comitas gentium_), the international courtesy by which effect is given to
the laws of one state within the territory of another state. [L.
_comitas_--_comis_, courteous.]

COMMA, kom'a, _n._ (_Shak._) a short part of a sentence: in punctuation,
the point (,) which marks the smallest division of a sentence: (_fig._) a
brief interval.--INVERTED COMMAS, marks of quotation ("..", '..').
[L.,--Gr. _komma_, a section of a sentence, from _koptein_, to cut off.]

COMMAND, kom-mand', _v.t._ to order: to bid: to exercise supreme authority
over: (_Shak._) to demand: to cause to act: (_Shak._) to exact: to have
within sight, influence, or control.--_v.i._ to have chief authority: to
govern.--_n._ an order: authority: message: the ability to overlook or
influence: the thing commanded.--_ns._ COMMANDANT', an officer who has the
command of a place or of a body of troops, COMMANDANT'SHIP.--_v.t._
COMMANDEER', to compel to military service.--_ns._ COMMAND'ER, one who
commands: an officer in the navy next in rank under a captain;
COMMAND'ER-IN-CHIEF, the highest staff appointment in the British army: the
officer in supreme command of an army, or of the entire forces of the
state; COMMAND'ERSHIP; COMMAND'ERY, the district under a commander,
specially used in connection with the Templars, the Hospitallers, and other
religious orders.--_adj._ COMMAND'ING, fitted to impress or
control.--_adv._ COMMAND'INGLY.--_n._ COMMAND'MENT, a command: a
precept.--COMMANDER OF THE FAITHFUL, a title of the caliphs.--AT COMMAND,
available for use; ON COMMAND, under orders.--TEN COMMANDMENTS, the ten
Mosaic laws: (_slang_) the ten finger-nails, used by women in fighting.
[Fr. _commander_--L. _commend[=a]re_--_com_, and _mand[=a]re_, to entrust.]

COMMEASURE, kom-mezh'[=u]r, _v.t._ to equal in measure: to coincide
with.--_n._ COMMEAS'URABLE (same as COMMEN'SURABLE).

COMMEMORATE, kom-em'o-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to call to remembrance by a solemn or
public act: to celebrate: to preserve the memory of.--_adj._
COMMEM'ORABLE.--_n._ COMMEMOR[=A]'TION, preserving the memory of some
person or thing by a solemn ceremony: the specification of individual
saints in the prayers for the dead: the great festival of the Oxford
academic year, usually taking place on the third Wednesday after Trinity
Sunday.--_adjs._ COMMEM'ORATIVE, COMMEM'ORATORY, tending or serving to
commemorate.--_n._ COMMEM'ORATOR. [L. _commemoratus_, pa.p. of
_commemor[=a]re_, to remember--_com_, inten., and _memor_, mindful.]

COMMENCE, kom-ens', _v.i._ to begin: to originate: to take rise.--_v.t._ to
begin: to originate: to enter upon: to take a university degree--e.g. 'to
commence M.A.'--_n._ COMMENCE'MENT, the beginning: at certain universities
the act of taking the degrees: the ceremony when these are conferred. [O.
Fr. _comencer_--L. _com_, and _initi[=a]re_, to begin--_in_, into, and
_[=i]re_, to go.]

COMMEND, kom-end', _v.t._ to give into the charge of: to recommend as
worthy: to praise: to adorn, set off.--_n._ (_Shak._) praise.--_adj._
COMMEND'ABLE, worthy of being commended or praised.--_n._
COMMEND'ABLENESS.--_adv._ COMMEND'ABLY.--_ns._ COMMEND'AM, a manner of
holding an ecclesiastical benefice till a proper pastor was provided for
it--it was provisionally _commended_ to the care of a clerk, and was said
to be held _in commendam_; COMMEND[=A]'TION, the act of commending: praise:
declaration of esteem: esp. the act of commending the dying or dead to the
favour and mercy of God; COM'MEND[=A]TOR, one who holds a benefice _in
commendam_.--_adj._ COMMEND'ATORY, commending: containing praise or
commendation: presenting to favourable notice or reception.--COMMEND ME TO,
remember me kindly to: give me by preference. [L. _commend[=a]re_--_com_,
and _mand[=a]re_, to trust.]

COMMENSAL, ko-men'sal, _adj._ eating at the same table.--_n._ a
messmate.--_n._ COMMEN'SALISM, the intimate but never parasitic association
of two organisms, for the benefit of one, or very often of both. [L. _com_,
together, _mensa_, a table.]

COMMENSURABLE, kom-en's[=u]-ra-bl, _adj._ having a common measure.--_ns._
COMMENSURABIL'ITY, COMMEN'SURABLENESS.--_adv._ COMMEN'SURABLY.--_adj._
COMMEN'SUR[=A]TE, of the same measure with: equal in measure or extent: in
proportion with.--_adv._ COMMEN'SUR[=A]TELY.--_ns._ COMMEN'SUR[=A]TENESS,
COMMENSUR[=A]'TION. [L. _com_, with, and _mensura_, a measure--_met[=i]ri_,
_mensus_, to measure.]

COMMENT, kom'ent, _n._ a note conveying an illustration or explanation: a
remark, observation, criticism.--_v.i._ (or kom-ent') to make critical or
explanatory notes: to annotate: (_Shak._) to meditate.--_ns._ COMM'ENTARY,
a comment: a remark: a book consisting of a regular series of comments or
notes on another book; COMMENT[=A]'TION, annotation; COMM'ENT[=A]TOR,
COMM'ENTER (or COMMENT'ER), COMM'ENTOR (or COMMENT'OR).--_adj._
COMMENTAT[=O]'RIAL, pertaining to the making of commentaries. [Fr.,--L.
_comment[=a]ri_--_com_, and L. _mens_, the mind.]

COMMERCE, kom'[.e]rs, _n._ interchange of merchandise on a large scale
between nations or individuals: extended trade or traffic: intercourse:
fellowship.--_v.i._ COMMERCE', to trade: to have communication
with.--_adj._ COMMER'CIAL, pertaining to commerce: mercantile.--_n._
commercial traveller.--_ns._ COMMER'CIALISM; COMMER'CIALIST;
COMMER'CIALITY.--_adv._ COMMER'CIALLY.--COMMERCIAL ROOM, a room in a hotel
set apart for commercial travellers; COMMERCIAL TRAVELLER, a person who
transacts business as the accredited travelling representative of a trading
house to other trading houses. [Fr.,--L. _commercium_--_com_, with, _merx_,
_mercis_, merchandise.]

COMMERGE, ko-m[.e]rj', _v.i._ to coincide, agree.

COMMINATE, kom'in-[=a]t, _v.t._ to threaten.--_n._ COMMIN[=A]'TION,
threatening, denunciation: a recital of God's threatenings made on
Ash-Wednesday and at other times in the English Church.--_adjs._
COMM'INATIVE, COMM'INATORY, threatening punishment. [L.,--_com_, inten.,
and _min[=a]ri_, to threaten.]

COMMINGLE, kom-ing'gl, _v.t._ to mingle or mix with.--_adj._ COMMIN'GLED.
[L. _com_, together, and MINGLE.]

COMMINUTE, kom'in-[=u]t, _v.t._ to reduce to minute particles: to
pulverise.--_n._ COMMIN[=U]'TION.--COMMINUTED FRACTURE, the breaking of a
bone in several places: a compound fracture. [L. _comminu[)e]re_,
_-[=u]tum_, to break into pieces--_com_, and _minu[)e]re_, to make
small--root _minus_, less.]

COMMISERATE, kom-iz'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to feel for the miseries of
another: to pity: to condole with.--_adj._ COMMIS'ERABLE, requiring
commiseration: pitiable.--_n._ COMMISER[=A]'TION, concern for the
sufferings of others: pity.--_adj._ COMMIS'ERATIVE, feeling or expressing
sympathetic sorrow.--_n._ COMMIS'ER[=A]TOR. [L. _com_, with, _miser[=a]ri_,
to deplore--_miser_, wretched.]

COMMISSARY, kom'is-ar-i, _n._ one to whom any charge is committed: a
deputy: (_Scots law_) the judge in a commissary court: a higher officer of
police: (_eccles._) an officer representing a bishop, and performing his
duties in distant parts of the diocese: an officer who furnishes
provisions, &c., to an army.--_adj._ COMMISS[=A]'RIAL, pertaining to a
commissary.--_ns._ COMMISS[=A]'RIAT, the department charged with the
furnishing of provisions, as for an army: the supply of provisions: the
office of a commissary; COMM'ISSARY-GEN'ERAL, the head of the department
for supplying provisions, &c., to an army; COMM'ISSARYSHIP.--COMMISSARY
COURT, a supreme court established in Edinburgh in 1563, with jurisdiction
in questions of marriage--its powers conjoined with those of the Court of
Session in 1836. [Low L. _commissarius_--L. _committ[)e]re_, _commissum_.]

COMMISSION, kom-ish'un, _n._ act of committing: that which is committed: a
writing conferring certain powers: authority: the percentage paid in a
transaction to an active agent who usually incurs some pecuniary and always
some moral responsibility: a body of persons appointed to perform certain
duties: a warrant from the head of the state for holding various military
offices, whether combatant or non-combatant.--_v.t._ to give a commission
to: to empower: to send: to appoint.--_ns._ COMMIS'SION-AG'ENT,
COMMIS'SION-MER'CHANT, a person employed to sell goods delivered to him by
another (his principal), for a certain percentage--his _commission_ or
factorage; COMMISSIONAIRE', a messenger, or light porter: one employed
about public places and hotels to undertake light commissions.--_adj._
COMMIS'SIONED.--_ns._ COMMIS'SIONER, one who holds a commission to perform
some business: a member of a commission; COMMIS'SIONERSHIP.--COMMISSIONED
OFFICER, one appointed by commission--in the navy, the officers from the
lieutenant; in the army, from the ensign upwards. [From COMMIT.]

COMMISSURE, kom'mis-s[=u]r, _n._ a joint: place where two bodies meet and
unite: (_anat._) a term applied to nervous connections between adjacent
parts of the nervous system.--_adj._ COMMIS'SURAL. [L., _commissura_, a
joining, from root of COMMIT.]

COMMIT, kom-it', _v.t._ to give in charge or trust: to consign: to do: to
endanger: to involve: to pledge:--_pr.p._ commit'ting; _pa.p._
commit'ted.--_ns._ COMMIT'MENT, act of committing: an order for sending to
prison: imprisonment; COMMIT'TAL, commitment: a pledge, actual or implied;
COMMIT'TEE, a portion, generally consisting of not less than three members,
selected from a more numerous body, to whom some special act to be
performed, or investigation to be made, is committed;
COMMIT'TEESHIP.--COMMIT ONE'S SELF, to compromise one's self: to pledge
one's self wittingly or unwittingly to a certain course; COMMIT TO MEMORY,
to learn by heart. [L. _committ[)e]re_--_com_, with, _mitt[)e]re_, to
send.]

COMMIX, kom-iks', _v.t._ to mix together.--_v.i._ to mix.--_ns._
COMMIX'TION, COMMIX'TURE, act of mixing together: the state of being mixed:
the compound formed by mixing: the rite of putting a piece of the host into
the chalice, emblematic of the reunion of body and soul at the
Resurrection.

COMMODIOUS, kom-[=o]'di-us, _adj._ suitable or convenient: roomy, spacious:
(_Shak._) serviceable: comfortable.--_n._ COMMODE', a small sideboard: a
large, high head-dress formerly worn by ladies: a box for holding a chamber
utensil: a night-stool.--_adv._ COMM[=O]'DIOUSLY.--_ns._
COMM[=O]'DIOUSNESS; COMMOD'ITY, convenience: (_Shak._) profit: (_Shak._)
parcel: an article of traffic: (_pl._) goods, produce. [L.
_commodus_--_com_, with, _modus_, measure.]

COMMODORE, kom'o-d[=o]r, _n._ in the royal navy, a rank intermediate
between an admiral and a captain: the leading ship in a fleet of
merchantmen: the president of a yacht-club, also his vessel at a regatta.
[Perh. from Dut. _kommandeur_.]

COMMON, kom'un, _adj._ belonging equally to more than one: public: general:
usual: frequent: ordinary: easy to be had: of little value: vulgar: of low
degree.--_n._ (_Shak._) the commonalty: a tract of open land, used in
common by the inhabitants of a town, parish, &c.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to
share.--_adj._ COMMON'ABLE, held in common.--_ns._ COMM'ONAGE, right of
pasturing on a common: the right of using anything in common: a common;
COMM'ONALTY, the general body of the people without any distinction of rank
or authority; COMM'ONER, one of the common people, as opposed to the
nobles: a member of the House of Commons: at Oxford, a student who pays for
his commons.--_adv._ COMM'ONLY.--_ns._ COMM'ONNESS; COMM'ONPLACE, a common
topic or subject: a platitude: a memorandum: a note.--_adj._ common:
hackneyed.--_v.i._ to make notes: to put in a commonplace-book.--_n._
COMM'ONPLACE-BOOK, a note or memorandum book.--_n.pl._ COMM'ONS, the common
people: their representatives--i.e. the lower House of Parliament or HOUSE
OF COMMONS: common land: food at a common table: at Oxford, rations served
at a fixed rate from the college buttery: food in general, rations.--_n._
COMM'ON-SENSE, average understanding: good sense or practical sagacity: the
opinion of a community: the universally admitted impressions of
mankind.--COMMON BENCH, COMMON PLEAS, one of the divisions of the High
Court of Justice; COMMON FORMS, the ordinary clauses which are of frequent
occurrence in identical terms in writs and deeds; COMMON LAW, in England,
the ancient customary law of the land; COMMON PRAYER (BOOK OF), the liturgy
of the Church of England; COMMON-RIDING, the Scotch equivalent of BEATING
THE BOUNDS (see BEAT); COMMON ROOM, in schools, colleges, &c., a room to
which the members have common access.--IN COMMON, together: equally with
others.--MAKE COMMON CAUSE WITH, to cast in one's lot with: to have the
same interests and aims with.--PHILOSOPHY OF COMMON-SENSE, that school of
philosophy which takes the universally admitted impressions of mankind as
corresponding to the facts of things without any further scrutiny.--SHORT
COMMONS, scant fare, insufficient supply of rations.--THE COMMON, that
which is common or usual; THE COMMON GOOD, the interest of the community at
large: the corporate property of a burgh in Scotland; THE COMMON PEOPLE,
the people in general. [Fr. _commun_--L. _communis_, prob. from _com_,
together, and _munis_, serving, obliging.]

COMMONWEAL, kom'un-w[=e]l, COMMONWEALTH, kom'un-welth, _n._ the common or
public good: the government in a free state: the public or whole body of
the people: a form of government in which the power rests with the people,
esp. that in England after the overthrow of Charles I. [See WEALTH.]

COMMOVE, kom-m[=oo]v', _v.t._ to put in motion: to agitate: to disturb,
excite.--_n._ COMM[=O]'TION, a violent motion or moving: excited or
tumultuous action, physical or mental: agitation: tumult. [L. _com_,
inten., and _mov[=e]re_, _motum_, to move.]

COMMUNE, kom'[=u]n, _n._ a corporation: in France, a territorial division
governed by a mayor.--The COMMUNE at Paris in 1871 was a revolt against the
national government, the principle of the revolt being that each city or
district should be ruled independently by its own commune or local
government.--_adj._ COMM[=U]'NAL (also COMM'UNAL).--_ns._
COMMUNALIS[=A]'TION; COMM[=U]'NALISM; COMM[=U]'NALIST. [Fr. _commune_. See
COMMON.]

COMMUNE, kom-[=u]n', _v.i._ to converse or talk together: to have
intercourse: to receive Holy Communion.--_ns._ COMM'UNE, converse: talk;
COMMUN'ING, conversing: communion. [O. Fr. _comuner_, to share--_comun_,
common.]

COMMUNICATE, kom-[=u]'ni-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to give a share of, impart: to
reveal: to bestow.--_v.i._ to have something in common with another: to
have communication: to have intercourse: to partake of Holy
Communion.--_ns._ COMMUNICABIL'ITY, COMM[=U]'NICABLENESS, the state of
being communicable.--_adj._ COMM[=U]'NICABLE, that may be communicated:
affable.--_adv._ COMM[=U]'NICABLY.--_ns._ COMM[=U]'NICANT, one who partakes
of Holy Communion; COMMUNIC[=A]'TION, act of communicating: that which is
communicated: intercourse: correspondence: a means of communicating, a
connecting passage or channel.--_adj._ COMM[=U]'NICATIVE, inclined to
communicate or give information: unreserved.--_adv._
COMM[=U]'NICATIVELY.--_n._ COMM[=U]'NICATIVENESS, the quality of being
communicative.--_adj._ COMM[=U]'NICATORY, imparting knowledge. [L.
_communic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, from _communis_.]

COMMUNION, kom-[=u]n'yun, _n._ act of communing: mutual intercourse:
fellowship: common possession: interchange of transactions: union in
religious service: the body of people who so unite.--_n._ COMMUN'IONIST, a
communicant.--THE COMMUNION, HOLY COMMUNION, the celebration of the Lord's
Supper. [L. _communion-em_, from _communis_.]

COMMUNISM, kom'[=u]-nizm, _n._ a theory or condition of things according to
which private property should be abolished, and all things held in
common.--_n._ COMM'UNIST, one who holds such principles.--_adj._
COMMUNIST'IC, pertaining to communism.

COMMUNITY, kom-[=u]n'i-ti, _n._ common possession or enjoyment: agreement:
communion: (_Shak._) commonness: people having common rights, &c.: the
public in general: a body of persons in the same locality, e.g. 'village
community:' a monastic body.--_n._ COMMUNIT[=A]'RIAN, a member of a
community. [O. Fr.,--L. _communitas_--_communis_.]

COMMUTE, kom-[=u]t', _v.t._ to exchange: to exchange a punishment for one
less severe.--_n._ COMMUTABIL'ITY.--_adj._ COMMUT'ABLE, that may be
commuted or exchanged.--_n._ COMMUT[=A]'TION, the act of commuting: change
or exchange of one thing for another: the change of a penalty or rate from
a greater to a less.--_adj._ COMM[=U]'TATIVE (or COMM'), relating to
exchange: interchangeable.--_adv._ COMM[=U]'TATIVELY.--_n._ COMM'UT[=A]TOR,
an apparatus attached to many electric machines for reversing the
currents.--_adj._ COMMUT'UAL, mutual. [L. _commut[=a]re_--_com_, with
_mut[=a]re_, to change.]

COMOSE, k[=o]'m[=o]s, _adj._ hairy, comate. [L. _comosus_.]

COMPACT, kom-pakt', _adj._ fastened or packed together: firm: close:
brief.--_v.t._ to press closely together: to consolidate: (_Shak._) to
confirm.--_adj._ COMPACT'ED, firmly put together: compact.--_adv._
COMPACT'EDLY.--_n._ COMPACT'EDNESS.--_adv._ COMPACT'LY.--_ns._
COMPACT'NESS, state of being compact: closeness: solidity: terseness;
COMPAC'TURE (_Spens._) close union or knitting together; COMP[=A]GE',
COMP[=A]'GES, a structure of many parts. [Fr.,--L. _com_, _pactus_, pa.p.
of _comping[)e]re_--_com_, together, _pang[)e]re_, to fix. Cf. FANG.]

COMPACT, kom'pakt, _n._ a mutual bargain or agreement: a league, treaty, or
union: (_Shak._) league, in bad sense.--_adj._ united: leagued. [L.
_compactum_--_compacisci_, from _com_, with, and _pacisci_, to make a
bargain; cf. _pang[)e]re_.]

COMPAGINATE, kom-paj'i-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to join, connect.--_n._
COMPAGIN[=A]'TION. [L. _compagin[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_com_, together, and
_pang[)e]re_, to fasten, fix.]

COMPANION, kom-pan'yun, _n._ one who keeps company or frequently associates
with another: an associate or partner: a higher rank of servant, who,
though receiving pay, stands rather in the relation of a friend: fellow, in
a bad sense.--_v.t._ to accompany.--_adj._ of the nature of a companion:
accompanying.--_adjs._ COMPAN'IABLE (_obs._), sociable; COMPAN'IONABLE, fit
to be a companion: agreeable.--_n._ COMPAN'IONABLENESS.--_adv._
COMPAN'IONABLY.--_adj._ COMPAN'IONED, having a companion.--_ns._
COMPAN'IONHOOD, COMPAN'IONARY.--_adj._ COMPAN'IONLESS, without a
companion.--_n._ COMPAN'IONSHIP. [Fr. _compagnon_, from Low L. _companium_,
a mess--L. _com_, with, and _panis_, bread.]

COMPANION, kom-pan'yun, _n._ (_naut._) the skylight or window-frame through
which light passes to a lower deck or cabin: companion-ladder.--_ns._
COMPAN'ION-LADD'ER, the ladder or stair leading from the deck to the
officers' cabin; COMPAN'ION-WAY, a staircase from the deck to a cabin. [Cf.
Dut. _kompanje_; O. Fr. _compagne_; It. _compagne_.]

COMPANY, kum'pa-ni, _n._ any assembly of persons: a number of persons
associated together for trade, &c.: a society: a subdivision of a regiment:
the crew of a ship: state of being a companion: fellowship: associates:
society: a gathering of people for social intercourse.--_v.t._ to
accompany.--_v.i._ to associate.--BE GOOD, or BAD, COMPANY, to have, or to
lack, companionable qualities; KEEP COMPANY, to associate with: to court;
KNOW A MAN BY HIS COMPANY, to determine his character by the quality of his
friends. [Fr. _compagnie_. See COMPANION.]

COMPARE, kom-p[=a]r', _v.t._ to set things together, to ascertain how far
they agree or disagree: to liken or represent as similar: (_gram._) to
inflect an adjective.--_v.i._ to hold comparison.--_n._ (_obs._)
comparison: similitude.--_adj._ COM'PARABLE, that may be compared.--_n._
COM'PARABLENESS.--_adv._ COM'PARABLY.--_adj._ COMPAR'ATIVE, pertaining to
comparison: estimated by comparing with something else: not positive or
absolute: (_gram._) expressing more.--_adv._ COMPAR'ATIVELY.--_n._
COMPAR'ISON, the act of comparing: capacity of being compared: comparative
estimate: a simile or figure by which two things are compared: (_gram._)
the inflection of an adjective.--BEYOND COMPARE, without any rival.
[Fr.,--L. _compar[=a]re_, to match, from _com_, together, _par[=a]re_, to
make or esteem equal--_par_, equal.]

COMPARE, kom-p[=a]r', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to get or provide. [L.
_compar[=a]re_--_com_, inten., _par[=a]re_, to prepare.]

COMPARTMENT, kom-pärt'ment, _n._ a separate part or division of any
enclosed space: a division of a railway carriage: a division of
anything.--_v.t._ COMPART', to divide into parts. [Fr., from
_compartir_--L. _com_, with, _part[=i]re_, to part.]

COMPASS, kum'pas, _n._ a circuit or circle: space: limit: range, a limit of
tones of a voice or instrument: the circumference: girth: an instrument
consisting of a magnetised needle, used to steer ships by, &c., the needle
indicating on a card the absolute directions at any given time: (_pl._) an
instrument consisting of two movable legs, for describing circles,
&c.--_v.t._ to pass or go round: to surround or enclose: to besiege: to
bring about or obtain: to contrive or plot: to accomplish.--_adj._
COM'PASSABLE, capable of being compassed.--_ns._ COM'PASS-CARD, the
circular card of a compass; COM'PASSING, contrivance: design;
COM'PASS-PLANE, a plane, convex on the under side, for smoothing curved
timber; COM'PASS-SAW, a saw that cuts in a circular manner;
COM'PASS-SIG'NAL, a signal denoting a point in the compass;
COM'PASS-TIM'BER, curved timber, used for shipbuilding, &c.;
COM'PASS-WIN'DOW, a semicircular bay-window.--BOX THE COMPASS (see BOX);
FETCH A COMPASS, to go round in a circuit. [Fr. _compas_, a circle, prob.
from Low L. _compassus_--L. _com_, together, _passus_, a step.]

COMPASSION, kom-pash'un, _n._ fellow-feeling, or sorrow for the sufferings
of another: pity.--_v.t._ to pity.--_adjs._ COMPAS'SIONABLE, pitiable;
COMPAS'SIONATE, inclined to pity or mercy: merciful.--_v.t._ to have
compassion for: to have pity or mercy upon.--_adv._ COMPAS'SIONATELY.--_n._
COMPAS'SIONATENESS. [Fr.,--L. _compassio_--_com_, with, _pati_, _passus_,
to suffer.]

COMPATIBLE, kom-pat'i-bl, _adj._ consistent: agreeable: that can be endured
together.--_ns._ COMPATIBIL'ITY, COMPAT'IBLENESS, the quality of being
compatible.--_adv._ COMPAT'IBLY. [Fr.,--L. _com_, with, _pati_, to suffer.]

COMPATRIOT, kom-p[=a]'tri-ot, _adj._ of the same country.--_n._ one of the
same country.--_adj._ COMPATRIOT'IC.--_n._ COMP[=A]'TRIOTISM. [Fr.,--L.
_com_, with, and PATRIOT.]

COMPEAR, kom-p[=e]r', _v.i._ (_Scots law_) to appear in court.--_ns._
COMPEAR'ANCE; COMPEAR'ANT. [L. _compar[=e]re_--_com_, together,
_par[=e]re_, to appear.]

COMPEER, kom-p[=e]r', _n._ one who is equal to another: a companion: an
associate.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to equal. [L. _compar_--_com_, with, and
_par_, equal.]

COMPEL, kom-pel', _v.t._ to drive or urge on forcibly: to oblige: to force:
to obtain by hard labour:--_pr.p._ compel'ling; _pa.p._ compelled'.--_adj._
COMPEL'LABLE. [L. _com_, inten., _pell[)e]re_, _pulsum_, to drive.]

COMPELLATION, kom-pel-[=a]'shun, _n._ style of address: an
appellation.--_adj._ COMPEL'LATIVE.--_n._ compellation. [L.
_compell[=a]re_, _-atum_, to address, freq. of _compell[)e]re_.]

COMPEND, kom'pend, COMPENDIUM, kom-pen'di-um, _n._ a shortening or
abridgment: a book or treatise containing the substance of a larger one: an
epitome: an abstract.--_adj._ COMPEN'DIOUS, short: concise:
comprehensive.--_adv._ COMPEN'DIOUSLY.--_n._ COMPEN'DIOUSNESS. [L.
_compendium_, what is weighed together, or saved (opp. to
_dispendium_)--_com_, together, _pend[)e]re_, to weigh.]

COMPENSATE, kom'pen-s[=a]t, or kom-pen's[=a]t, _v.t._ to reward suitably:
to make amends for: to recompense: to counterbalance.--_n._
COMPENS[=A]'TION, act of compensating: reward for service: amends for loss
sustained: (_phys._) the neutralisation of opposing forces.--_adjs._
COMPEN'SATIVE, COMPEN'SATORY, giving compensation.--_n._ COM'PENS[=A]TOR,
one who or that which compensates.--COMPENSATION BALANCE, PENDULUM, a
balance-wheel or pendulum so constructed as to counteract the effect of the
expansion and contraction of the metal under variation of temperature. [L.
_com_, inten., and _pens[=a]re_, freq. of _pend[)e]re_, to weigh.]

COMPESCE, kom-pes', _v.t._ to restrain. [L. _compesc[)e]re_--_compes_, a
fetter--_com_, together, _pes_, a foot.]

COMPETE, kom-p[=e]t', _v.i._ to seek or strive with others for something:
to contend for a prize.--_n._ COMPETI'TION, the act of competing: common
strife for the same object.--_adj._ COMPET'ITIVE, pertaining to or
characterised by competition.--_n._ COMPET'ITOR, one who competes: a rival
or opponent. [L. _compet[)e]re_--_com_, together, _pet[)e]re_, to seek.]

COMPETENT, kom'pe-tent, _adj._ suitable: sufficient: fit: belonging:
legally qualified: legitimate.--_ns._ COM'PETENCE, COM'PETENCY, fitness:
capacity: sufficiency: competent circumstances: legal power or
capacity.--_adv._ COM'PETENTLY. [Fr.,--L. _compet[)e]re_--_com_, with,
_pet[)e]re_, to seek, to strive after.]

COMPILE, kom-p[=i]l', _v.t._ to write or compose by collecting the
materials from other books: to draw up or collect: to compose.--_ns._
COMPIL[=A]'TION, the act of compiling: the thing compiled, a literary work
made by gathering the material from various authors; COMPILE'MENT, a
compilation; COMPIL'ER, COM'PIL[=A]TOR, one who compiles. [Fr. _compiler_,
prob. from L. _compil[=a]re_--_com_, together, _pil[=a]re_, to plunder.]

COMPLACENT, kom-pl[=a]'sent, _adj._ showing satisfaction: pleased: inclined
to please.--_ns._ COMPL[=A]'CENCE, COMPL[=A]'CENCY, pleasure: satisfaction:
complaisance.--_adv._ COMPL[=A]'CENTLY. [L. _complac[=e]re_--_com_, inten.,
_plac[=e]re_, to please.]

COMPLAIN, kom-pl[=a]n', _v.i._ to express grief, pain, censure: to murmur
or express a sense of injury: to accuse: to make a mournful sound: to be
ill--e.g. 'to complain of a sore throat.'--_n._ complaint.--_ns._
COMPLAIN'ANT, one who complains: (_law_) one who raises a suit, a
plaintiff; COMPLAIN'ER, a murmurer: complainant; COMPLAIN'ING, the action
of the verb _complain_: complaint.--_adv._ COMPLAIN'INGLY.--_n._
COMPLAINT', a complaining: an expression of grief: a representation of
pains or injuries: a finding fault: the thing complained of: a disease: an
ailment. [Fr. _complaindre_--Low L. _complang[)e]re_--L. _com_, inten.,
_plang[)e]re_, bewail.]

COMPLAISANT, kom'pl[=a]-zant, or kom-pl[=a]-zant', _adj._ desirous of
pleasing; obliging.--_n._ COM'PLAISANCE (or COMPLAISANCE'), care or desire
to please: an obliging civility.--_adv._ COM'PLAISANTLY (or
COMPLAISANT'LY). [Fr.,--_complaire_--L. _complac[=e]re_.]

COMPLECT, kom-plekt', _v.t._ to embrace: to interweave.--_adj._
COMPLECT'ED, interwoven. [L. _complecti_, to embrace--_com_, and
_plect[)e]re_, to twine.]

COMPLEMENT, kom'ple-ment, _n._ that which completes or fills up: full
number or quantity: (_Shak._) politeness.--_v.t._ COMPLEMENT', to
supplement: (_arch._) to compliment.--_adjs._ COMPLEMENT'AL, completing:
(_Shak._) complimental; COMPLEMENT'ARY, completing: together making up a
whole.--COMPLEMENTARY ANGLES, angles which together make up a right angle.
[L. _complementum_--_com_, and _pl[=e]re_, to fill.]

COMPLETE, kom-pl[=e]t', _adj._ free from deficiency: perfect: finished:
entire.--_v.t._ to finish: to make perfect or entire: to
accomplish.--_adjs._ COMPL[=E]T'ABLE; COMPL[=E]T'ED.--_adv._
COMPLETE'LY.--_ns._ COMPLETE'NESS, the state of being complete;
COMPL[=E]'TION, the act of completing: the state of being complete:
fulfilment.--_adjs._ COMPL[=E]T'IVE; COMPL[=E]T'ORY, fulfilling:
completing. [L. _compl[=e]re_, _-[=e]tum_, to fill up--_com_, inten., and
_pl[=e]re_, to fill.]

COMPLEX, kom'pleks, _adj._ composed of more than one, or of many parts: not
simple: intricate: difficult.--_n._ a complex whole.--_v.t._ to
complicate.--_ns._ COMPLEX'EDNESS, COM'PLEXNESS, COMPLEX'ITY, state of
being complex: complication.--_adv._ COM'PLEXLY.--_n._ COMPLEX'US, a
complicated system: a large muscle of the back, passing from the spine to
the head. [L. _complex_--_com_, together, and root of _plic[=a]re_, to
fold. See COMPLICATE.]

COMPLEXION, kom-plek'shun, _n._ disposition: colour: quality: colour or
look of the skin, esp. of the face: general appearance, temperament, or
texture: (_Shak._) bodily constitution.--_v.t._ to give a colour
to.--_adjs._ COMPLEX'IONAL, pertaining to the complexion; COMPLEX'IONED,
having a certain complexion, or temperament; COMPLEX'IONLESS, colourless:
pale. [Fr.,--L. _complexio_, a combination, physical structure of
body--_complecti_, _complexus_, to embrace--_plect[)e]re_, to plait.]

COMPLIANCE, kom-pl[=i]'ans, _n._ a yielding: agreement: complaisance:
assent: submission (in bad sense).--_adj._ COMPL[=I]'ABLE, disposed to
comply.--_n._ COMPL[=I]'ANCY, compliance.--_adj._ COMPL[=I]'ANT, yielding:
pliant: civil.--_adv._ COMPL[=I]'ANTLY.--IN COMPLIANCE WITH, in agreement
with. [See COMPLY.]

COMPLICATE, kom'pli-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to twist or plait together: to render
complex: to entangle.--_adj._ complex: involved.--_n._ COM'PLICACY, the
quality or state of being complicated.--_adj._ COM'PLICATED, intricate,
confused.--_n._ COMPLIC[=A]'TION, an intricate blending or
entanglement.--_adj._ COM'PLICATIVE, tending to complicate.--COMPLICATED
FRACTURE, a fracture where there is some other injury (e.g. a flesh wound
not communicating with the fracture, a dislocation, a rupture of a large
blood-vessel); COMPLICATION OF DISEASES, a number of diseases present at
the same time. [L. _com_, together, and _plic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to fold.]

COMPLICE, kom'plis, _n._ (_Shak._) an associate: an accomplice.--_n._
COMPLIC'ITY, state or condition of being an accomplice: complexity.

COMPLIMENT, kom'pli-ment, _n._ an expression of regard or praise: delicate
flattery: an expression of formal respect or civility: a present.--_v.t._
COMPLIMENT', to pay a compliment to: to express respect for: to praise: to
flatter: to congratulate: to make a present.--_v.i._ to make
compliments.--_adjs._ COMPLIMENT'AL, expressing or implying compliment;
COMPLIMENT'ARY, conveying, or expressive of, civility or praise: using
compliments.--_n._ COMPLIMENT'ER, one who pays compliments.--COMPLIMENTS OF
THE SEASON, compliments appropriate to special times, as Christmas and
birthdays; LEFT-HANDED COMPLIMENT, a saying intended to seem a compliment,
but in reality the reverse; PAY, or PRESENT, ONE'S COMPLIMENTS, to give
one's respects or greeting. [Fr. _compliment_--L. _complementum_. See
COMPLY.]

COMPLINE, COMPLIN, kom'plin, _n._ the 7th and last service of the day, at 9
P.M., completing the canonical hours. [O. Fr. _conplie_ (mod.
_complies_)--L. _completa_ (_hora_).]

COMPLISH, kom'plish, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to accomplish.

COMPLOT, kom'plot, _n._ a conspiracy.--_v.i._ COMPLOT', to plot together,
to conspire.--_v.t._ to plan.--_pr.p._ complot'ting; _pa.p._ complot'ted.
[Fr.]

COMPLUVIUM, kom-pl[=oo]'vi-um, _n._ a quadrangular open space in the middle
of a Roman house, which carried the rain-water from the roofs to a basin
(_impluvium_) placed below. [L.]

COMPLY, kom-pl[=i]', _v.i._ to yield to the wishes of another: to agree or
consent to (_with_):--_pr.p._ comply'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._
complied'.--_n._ COMPL[=I]'ER, one who complies.--_p.adj._ COMPLY'ING,
compliant. [It. _complire_, to fulfil, to suit, to offer courtesies--L.
_compl[=e]re_, to fulfil.]

COMPO, kom'p[=o], _n._ a mixture of whiting, resin, and glue for
ornamenting walls and cornices; a bankrupt's composition. [Abbrev. of
COMPOSITION.]

COMPONENT, kom-p[=o]'nent, _adj._ making up: forming one of the elements of
a compound.--_n._ one of the elements of a compound.--_n._
COMP[=O]'NENCY.--_adj._ COMPONENT'AL. [L. _compon[)e]re_.]

COMPORT, kom-p[=o]rt', _v.i._ to agree, suit (_with_).--_v.t._ to bear
one's self: to behave.--_n._ manner of acting.--_ns._ COMPORT'ANCE
(_Spens._); COMPORT'MENT, behaviour. [L. _comport[=a]re_--_com_, together,
and _port[=a]re_, to carry.]

COMPOSE, kom-p[=o]z', _v.t._ to form by putting two or more parts or things
together: to place in proper order, to put together, to arrange
artistically the elements of a landscape for painting: to settle or set at
rest: to soothe: to set up or place types in order for printing: to
originate or write as author, to set to music.--_p.adj._ COMPOSED',
settled, quiet, calm.--_adv._ COMPOS'EDLY.--_ns._ COMPOS'EDNESS; COMPOS'ER,
a writer, an author, esp. of a piece of music.--_adj._ COM'POSITE, made up
of two or more distinct parts: (_archit._) a blending of the Ionic and the
Corinthian orders: (_bot._) belonging to the natural order _Compositæ_,
having compound or composite flowers--heads of flowers composed of a number
of florets on a common receptacle, surrounded by bracts forming a leafy
involucre, like single flowers.--_adv._ COM'POSITELY.--_ns._
COM'POSITENESS; COMPOS'ING-STICK, an instrument with a sliding adjustment,
used for holding printing-types before they are put on the galley;
COMPOS'ITION, the act of putting together, or that which is put together:
the thing composed, as a work in literature, music, or painting: mental
constitution: artistic manner, style in writing or painting: a coming
together or agreement, an arrangement or compromise: a certain percentage
which creditors agree to accept in lieu of the full payment of a bankrupt's
debts: (_mech._) the compounding of two velocities or forces into a single
velocity or force which shall be their equivalent.--_adj._
COMPOS'ITIVE.--_ns._ COMPOS'ITOR, one who puts together, or sets up, types
for printing; COM'POST, COMPOST'URE (_Shak._) a mixture for manure: a kind
of plaster; COMP[=O]'SURE, calmness: self-possession:
tranquillity.--COMPOSITE CANDLE, one made of a mixture of stearic acid and
the stearin of coco-nut oil; COMPOSITE CARRIAGE, a railway-carriage with
compartments of different classes; COMPOSITE PORTRAIT, a single portrait
produced by combining those of a number of persons; COMPOSITION OF A
FELONY, the act of abstaining from prosecution for some
consideration--itself punishable by fine and imprisonment. [Fr. _composer_,
from L. _cum_, and _paus[=a]re_, to cease, to rest.]

COMPOS MENTIS, kom'pos ment'is, _adj. phrase_, in one's right
mind--sometimes merely COMPOS. [L.]

COMPOSSIBLE, kom-pos'i-bl, _adj._ possible in co-existence with something
else.--_n._ COMPOSSIBIL'ITY. [L. _com-_, and POSSIBLE.]

COMPOT, kom'pot, _n._ fruit preserved in syrup. [Fr. _compote_.]

COMPOTATION, kom-po-t[=a]'shun, _n._ a carouse together.--_ns._
COMPOT[=A]'TIONSHIP; COM'POTATOR, a bottle-companion.--_adj._ COMPOT'ATORY.
[L. _compotationem_--_com_, together, _pot[=a]re_, to drink.]

COMPOUND, kom-pownd', _v.t._ to mix or combine: to settle or adjust by
agreement.--_v.i._ to agree, or come to terms: to bargain in the
lump.--_adj._ COM'POUND, mixed or composed of a number of parts: not
simple, dealing with numbers of various denominations of quantity, &c., as
in 'compound addition,' &c.; or with processes more complex than the simple
process, as in 'compound proportion,' &c.--_n._ a mass made up of a number
of parts: the usual name in India for the enclosure in which a house
stands, with its outhouses, yard, and garden: a compounded drug.--_n._
COMPOUND'ER.--COMPOUND ENGINE, a condensing engine in which the mechanical
action of the steam is begun in one cylinder, and ended in a larger
cylinder; COMPOUND FRACTURE, a broken bone, communicating with a
co-existing skin wound; COMPOUND HOUSEHOLDER, one who pays his rates in his
rent, the landlord being immediately chargeable with them; COMPOUND
INTEREST, the charge made where--the interest not being paid when due--it
is added to the principal, forming the amount upon which the subsequent
year's interest is computed; COMPOUND QUANTITY (_alg._), a quantity
consisting of more than one term, as _a + b_; COMPOUND TIME (_mus._), time
in which each bar is made up of two or more simple bars. [O. Fr., from L.
_compon[)e]re_--_com_, together, _pon[)e]re_, to place.]

COMPREHEND, kom-pre-hend', _v.t._ to seize or take up with the mind, to
understand: to comprise or include.--_ns._ COMPREHENSIBIL'ITY,
COMPREHEN'SIBLENESS.--_adj._ COMPREHEN'SIBLE, capable of being
understood.--_adv._ COMPREHEN'SIBLY.--_n._ COMPREHEN'SION, power of the
mind to understand: (_logic_) the intension of a term or the sum of the
qualities implied in the term: the inclusion of Nonconformists within the
Church of England.--_adj._ COMPREHEN'SIVE, having the quality or power of
comprehending much: extensive: full.--_adv._ COMPREHEN'SIVELY.--_n._
COMPREHEN'SIVENESS. [L. _comprehend[)e]re_, to seize.]

COMPRESS, kom-pres', _v.t._ to press together: to force into a narrower
space: to condense or concentrate.--_n._ COM'PRESS, soft folds of linen,
&c., formed into a pad, and used in surgery to apply any requisite pressure
to any part: a wet cloth, covered with waterproof, applied to the
skin.--_adj._ COMPRESSED'.--_ns._ COMPRESSIBIL'ITY, COMPRES'SIBLENESS, the
property that bodies have of being reduced in volume by pressure--the ratio
of the amount of compression per unit volume to the compressing force
applied.--_adj._ COMPRES'SIBLE, that may be compressed.--_n._ COMPRES'SION,
act of compressing: state of being compressed, condensation.--_adjs._
COMPRES'SIONAL; COMPRES'SIVE, able to compress.--_ns._ COMPRES'SOR,
anything that compresses; a muscle that compresses certain parts;
COMPRES'SURE.--COMPRESSED-AIR BATH, a strong chamber of iron plates in
which a patient can sit, and into which air is driven by a steam-engine to
any required pressure; COMPRESSED-AIR MOTOR, any mode of employing air as a
motive-power, as in automatic railway-brakes, &c. [L. _compress[=a]re_,
_com_, together, and _press[=a]re_, to press--_prem[)e]re_, _pressum_, to
press.]

COMPRINT, kom-print', _v.t._ to share in printing--of the former privilege
shared with the Stationers' Company and the King's Printer by Oxford and
Cambridge.

COMPRISE, kom-pr[=i]z', _v.t._ to contain, include: to sum up.--_adj._
COMPRIS'ABLE.--_n._ COMPRIS'AL, the act of comprising.--_p.adjs._
COMPRISED', included; COMPRIS'ING, including. [Fr. _compris_, pa.p. of
_comprendre_--L. _comprehend[)e]re_. See COMPREHEND.]

COMPROMISE, kom'pr[=o]-m[=i]z, _n._ a settlement of differences by mutual
concession, adjustment of one's theories or principles.--_v.t._ to settle
by mutual agreement and concession: to pledge: to involve or bring into
question--to expose one's self to risk of danger or
misunderstanding.--_p.adj._ COM'PROMISED, exposed to danger or discredit.
[Fr. _compromis_--L. _compromitt[)e]re_, _-missum_--_com_, together,
_promitt[)e]re_, to promise.]

COMPROVINCIAL, kom-pro-vin'shal, _adj._ (_Spens._) belonging to the same
province.

COMPT, COMPTER, COMPTIBLE, obs. forms of COUNT, &c.

COMPTROLL, COMPTROLLER. See under CONTROL.

COMPULSE, kom-puls', _v.t._ to compel.--_adjs._ COMPUL'SATORY,
COMPUL'SATIVE (_Shak._), compulsory.--_p.adj._ COMPULSED',
compelled.--_ns._ COMPUL'SION, the act of compelling: force: necessity:
violence; COMPUL'SITOR (_Scots law_), that which compels.--_adj._
COMPUL'SIVE, coercive: with power to compel.--_adv._ COMPUL'SIVELY;
COMPUL'SORILY.--_adj._ COMPUL'SORY, compelled: obligatory: compelling. [L.
_compuls[=a]re_, freq. of _compell[)e]re_, to compel.]

COMPUNCTION, kom-pungk'shun, _n._ uneasiness of conscience: remorse:
regret: pity.--_adj._ COMPUNC'TIOUS, feeling or causing compunction:
repentant: remorseful.--_adv._ COMPUNC'TIOUSLY.--WITHOUT COMPUNCTION, with
no feeling of sorrow or regret. [O. Fr.,--L. _compunctio_, _-nis_--_com_,
inten., and _pung[)e]re_, _punctum_, to prick.]

COMPURGATION, kom-pur-g[=a]'shun, _n._ the custom, in Anglo-Saxon law, of
permitting the accused to call in witnesses to prove his innocency, by
joining their oaths to his: evidence in favour of the accused:
vindication.--_n._ COM'PURGATOR, one who testifies to the innocency or
veracity of another.--_adjs._ COMPURGAT[=O]'RIAL, COMPUR'GATORY. [L.
_compurg[=a]re_, to purify wholly. See PURGE.]

COMPURSION, kom-pur'shun, _n._ a pursing together (_Sterne_).

COMPUTE, kom-p[=u]t', _v.t._ to calculate: to number: to estimate.--_adj._
COMPUT'ABLE, calculable.--_ns._ COM'PUTANT, COMPUT'ER, COM'PUTIST, a
calculator; COMPUT[=A]'TION, act of computing: reckoning: estimate.--_adj._
COMPUT'[=A]TIVE, given to computation.--_n._ COM'PUT[=A]TOR. [L.
_comput[=a]re_, from _com_, together, _put[=a]re_, to reckon.]

COMRADE, kom'r[=a]d, _n._ a close companion: an intimate associate--_ns._
COM'RADERY; COM'RADESHIP. [Sp. _camarada_, a roomful, a chamber-mate--L.
_camera_, a chamber.]

COMTISM, komt'ism, _n._ the philosophical system of August _Comte_, the
founder of Positivism (1798-1857).--_adj._ COM'TIAN.--_n._ and _adj._
COMT'IST.

COMUS, k[=o]'mus, _n._ a god of mirth: a revel. [L.,--Gr. _k[=o]mos_, a
revel.]

CON., kon, a contraction of L. _contra_, against, as in PRO AND CON., for
and against.

CON, kon, _v.t._ to study carefully: to commit to memory:--_pr.p._
con'ning; _pa.p._ conned.--_n._ CON'NING, learning by heart; poring over.
[A.S. _cunnian_, to try to know--_cunnan_, to know.]

CON, CONN, kon, kun, _v.t._ to direct the steering of a ship.--_n._ the act
of conning.--_ns._ CON'NING, directing the steering; CON'NING-TOW'ER, the
pilot-house of a war-ship. [Prob. conn. with preceding.]

CON, kon, _n._ a knock. [Fr. _cogner_, to knock.]

CONACRE, kon'[=a]-k[.e]r, _n._ the custom of letting land in Ireland in
small portions for a single crop, the rent paid in money or in labour--also
CORN'ACRE.--_v.t._ to sublet in conacre.--_n._ CON'ACREISM.

CONARIUM, k[=o]-n[=a]'ri-um, _n._ the pineal gland of the brain.--_adj._
CON[=A]'RIAL. [Gr. _k[=o]narion_.]

CONATUS, ko-n[=a]'tus, _n._ an effort: an impulse.--_n._ CON[=A]'TION, the
faculty of free agency, including desire and volition.--_adj._
CON[=A]'TIVE. [L. _con[=a]ri_, _-[=a]tus_, to endeavour.]

CONCATENATE, kon-kat'e-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to chain or link together: to connect
in a series.--_n._ CONCATEN[=A]'TION, a series of links united: a series of
things depending on each other. [L. _con_, together, and _catena_, a
chain.]

CONCAUSE, kon'kawz, _n._ a co-operating cause.

CONCAVE, kon'k[=a]v, _adj._ curved, vaulted, or arched, applied to the
inner side of any curved line or rounded body, and opposed to _convex_,
which is applied to the outside.--_n._ a hollow: an arch or vault.--_adv._
CON'CAVELY.--_n._ CONCAV'ITY, the quality of being concave: the inner
surface of a concave or hollow body.--_adjs._ CONC[=A]'VO-CON'CAVE, or
DOUB'LE-CON'CAVE, concave on both sides of a lens; CONC[=A]'VO-CON'VEX,
concave on one side, and convex on the other. [L. _concavus_, from _con_,
inten., and _cavus_, hollow. See CAVE.]

CONCEAL, kon-s[=e]l', _v.t._ to hide completely or carefully: to keep
secret; to disguise: to keep from telling.--_adjs._ CONCEAL'ABLE, that may
be concealed; CONCEALED', hidden.--_n._ CONCEAL'MENT, act of concealing:
secrecy: disguise: hiding-place: (_Shak._) a mystery. [O. Fr.
_conceler_--L. _concel[=a]re_, from _con_, inten., and _cel[=a]re_, to
hide.]

CONCEDE, kon-s[=e]d', _v.t._ to cede or give up: to quit: to surrender: to
admit: to grant.--_v.i._ to admit or grant.--_n._ CONCED'ER. [L.
_conced[)e]re_, _-cessum_--_con_, wholly and _ced[)e]re_, to yield.]

CONCEIT, kon-s[=e]t', _n._ over-estimate of one's self: too favourable
opinion of one's own good qualities: a pleasant, fantastical, or affected
notion: wit: (_Spens._) idea: (_Shak._) understanding: estimate.--_v.t._ to
conceive: to think.--_adj._ CONCEIT'ED, clever, witty, fantastical (_obs.
uses_): having a high opinion of one's self: egotistical.--_adv._
CONCEIT'EDLY.--_n._ CONCEIT'EDNESS.--_adj._ CONCEIT'LESS (_Shak._), without
conceit, stupid.--OUT OF CONCEIT WITH, no longer fond of. [Through a Fr.
form _conceit_, from L. _conceptus_, pa.p. of _concip[)e]re_.]

CONCEIVE, kon-s[=e]v', _v.t._ to receive into and form in the womb: to form
in the mind: to imagine or think: to understand: to express.--_v.i._ to
become pregnant: to think.--_ns._ CONCEIVABIL'ITY,
CONCEIV'ABLENESS.--_adj._ CONCEIV'ABLE, that may be conceived, understood,
or believed.--_adv._ CONCEIV'ABLY.--_adj._ CONCEIVED', imagined, thought.
[O. Fr. _concever_--L. _concip[)e]re_, _conceptum_, from _con_, and
_cap[)e]re_, to take.]

CONCENT, kon-sent', _n._ a harmony or concord of sounds: concert of
voices.--_v.i._ (_Spens._) to harmonise. [L. _concentus_, pa.p. of
_concin[)e]re_--_con_, together, _can[)e]re_, to sing.]

CONCENTRATE, kon'sen-tr[=a]t, or kon-sen'-, _v.t._ to bring towards a
common centre: to bring into a closer union: to condense, to render more
intense the properties of.--_adj._ CONCEN'TRATED (also CON'-).--_n._
CONCENTR[=A]'TION, act of concentrating: condensation: the keeping of the
mind fixed on something.--_adj._ CONCEN'TRATIVE, tending to
concentrate.--_n._ CONCEN'TRATIVENESS. [A lengthened form of CONCENTRE.]

CONCENTRE, kon-sent'[.e]r, _v.i._ to tend to or meet in a common centre: to
be concentric.--_v.t._ to bring or direct to a common centre or
point:--_pr.p._ concent'ring; _pa.p._ concent'red or concent'ered.--_adjs._
CONCEN'TRIC, -AL, having a common centre.--_adv._ CONCEN'TRICALLY.--_n._
CONCENTRIC'ITY. [Fr. _concentrer_--L. _con_, with, _centrum_, the centre.]

CONCEPT, kon'sept, _n._ a thing conceived, a general notion.--_ns._
CONCEP'TACLE, that in which anything is contained, a receptacle: (_bot._) a
pericarp of one valve, a follicle: a cavity enclosing the reproductive
cells in certain plants and animals; CONCEP'TION, the act of conceiving:
the thing conceived; the formation in the mind of an image or idea: a
notion: (_Shak._) a mere fancy: a plan: a concept; CONCEP'TIONIST.--_adjs._
CONCEP'TIOUS (_Shak._), fruitful; CONCEPT'IVE, capable of conceiving
mentally; CONCEP'TUAL, pertaining to conception.--_ns._ CONSEP'TUALISM, the
doctrine in philosophy that universals have an existence in the mind apart
from any concrete embodiment; CONCEP'TUALIST, one who holds this
doctrine.--_adj._ CONCEPTUALIS'TIC. [L. _concip[)e]re_, _-ceptum_, to
conceive.]

CONCERN, kon-sern', _v.t._ to relate or belong to: to affect or interest:
to make uneasy: to trouble: to have to do with: to be affected.--_n._ that
which concerns or belongs to one: interest: regard: anxiety: a business, or
those connected with it.--_adj._ CONCERNED', having connection with:
interested: anxious.--_adv._ CONCERN'EDLY.--_n._ CONCERN'EDNESS.--_prep._
CONCERN'ING, regarding: pertaining to.--_n._ CONCERN'MENT, a thing in which
one is concerned: an affair: importance: interest: interference. [Fr.,--L.
_concern[)e]re_, _con_, together, _cern[)e]re_, to see.]

CONCERT, kon's[.e]rt, _n._ union or agreement in any undertaking: harmony:
musical harmony: a musical entertainment.--_v.t._ CONCERT', to frame or
devise together: to arrange, adjust.--_p.adj._ CONCERT'ED, mutually
planned: arranged.--_ns._ CONCERTINA (kon-ser-t[=e]'na), a musical
instrument consisting of a pair of bellows, usually polygonal, the sounds
produced by free vibrating reeds of metal, as in the accordion; CONCER'TO,
a musical composition for a solo instrument, with orchestral
accompaniments.--CONCERT PITCH (_mus._), the pitch at which instruments for
concert use are tuned. [Fr. _concerter_--It. _concert[=a]re_, to sing in
concert.]

CONCESSION, kon-sesh'un, _n._ the act of conceding: the thing conceded: a
grant.--_adj._ CONCES'SIBLE.--_n._ CONCESSIONAIRE', one who has obtained a
concession.--_adj._ CONCES'SIONARY.--_n._ CONCES'SIONIST.--_adj._
CONCES'SIVE, implying concession. [CONCEDE.]

CONCETTO, kon-chet'to, _n._ an ingenious turn of expression: a
conceit:--_pl._ CONCET'TI.--_n._ CONCET'TISM, the use of concetti.
[It.,--L. _conceptum_, conceit.]

CONCH, kongk, _n._ a marine shell: a spiral shell used by the Tritons as a
trumpet, and still used by some African peoples in war: a name for the
native whites of the Bahamas, owing to their use of conchs as food:
(_archit._) the semidome of an apse; the apse itself.--_n._ CONCHIF'ERA, a
term applied by Lamarck to bivalve molluscs and to very different
Brachiopods.--_adjs._ CONCHIF'EROUS, having a shell; CONCH'IFORM,
conch-shaped.--_n._ CONCH'OID, a plane curve invented to solve the problem
of trisecting a plane angle, doubling the cube, &c.--_adjs._ CONCHOID'AL,
pertaining to a conchoid: shell-like, applied to the fracture of a mineral;
CONCHOLOG'ICAL, pertaining to conchology.--_ns._ CONCHOL'OGIST;
CONCHOL'OGY, that branch of natural history which deals with the shells of
molluscs. [L. _concha_--Gr. _kongch[=e]_; Sans. _cankha_, a shell; conn.
with COCKLE.]

CONCHA, kong'ka, _n._ the central cavity of the outer ear: the outer ear:
(_archit._) conch. [L. _concha_.]

CONCIERGE, kong-si-erj', _n._ a warden: a janitor. [Fr.; der. unknown.]

CONCILIAR, kon-sil'i-ar, _adj._ pertaining to a council.--Also CONCIL'IARY.

CONCILIATE, kon-sil'i-[=a]t, _v.t._ to gain, or win over: to gain the love
or good-will of such as have been indifferent or hostile: to
pacify.--_v.i._ to make friends.--_adj._ CONCIL'IABLE (_obs._).--_n._
CONCILI[=A]'TION, act of conciliating.--_adj._ CONCIL'I[=A]TIVE.--_n._
CONCIL'I[=A]TOR.--_adj._ CONCIL'IATORY. [L. _concili[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_concilium_, council.]

CONCINNITY, kon-sin'i-ti, _n._ harmony: congruity: elegance.--_adj._
CONCINN'OUS, elegant: harmonious. [L. _concinnus_, well adjusted.]

CONCIPIENT, kon-sip'i-ent, _adj._ that which conceives.--_n._ CONCIP'IENCY.

CONCISE, kon-s[=i]s', _adj._ cut short: brief.--_v.t._ (_Milt._) to
mutilate.--_adv._ CONCISE'LY.--_ns._ CONCISE'NESS, the quality of being
concise: terseness [Fr.,--L. _concid[)e]re_, _concisum_, from _con_, and
_cæd[)e]re_, to cut.]

CONCISION, kon-sizh'on, _n._ mutilation: (_B._) circumcision: conciseness.

CONCLAMATION, kon-kla-m[=a]'shun, _n._ a shout of many together.

CONCLAVE, kon'kl[=a]v, _n._ the room in which cardinals meet to elect a
pope: the body of cardinals: any close assembly.--_n._ CON'CLAVIST, an
attendant on a cardinal in conclave. [L. _conclave_, from _con_, together,
_clavis_, a key.]

CONCLUDE, kon-kl[=oo]d', _v.t._ to close: to end: to oblige.--_v.i._ to
end: to infer: to form a final judgment.--_p.adj._ CONCLUD'ED, finished:
settled.--_adj._ CONCLUD'ING, final, closing.--_n._ CONCLU'SION, act of
concluding: the end, close, or last part: inference: judgment: an
experiment: (_Shak._) a riddle.--_adjs._ CONCLUS'IVE, CONCLU'SORY, final:
convincing.--_adv._ CONCLUS'IVELY.--_n._ CONCLUS'IVENESS.--IN CONCLUSION,
finally.--TO TRY CONCLUSIONS, to experiment: to engage in a contest. [L.
_conclud[)e]re_, _conclusum_--_con_, together, _claud[)e]re_, to shut.]

CONCOCT, kon-kokt', _v.t._ to digest: to prepare or mature: to make up a
mixture: to plan, devise: to fabricate.--_ns._ CONCOCT'ER, CONCOCT'OR;
CONCOC'TION, act of concocting: ripening: preparation of a medical
prescription, &c.: a made-up story.--_adj._ CONCOCT'IVE, pertaining to
concoction. [L. _concoqu[)e]re_, _concoctum_--_con_, together, and
_coqu[)e]re_, to cook, to boil.]

CONCOMITANT, kon-kom'i-tant, _adj._ accompanying or going along with:
conjoined with.--_n._ he who or that which accompanies.--_ns._
CONCOM'ITANCE, CONCOM'ITANCY, state of being concomitant.--_adv._
CONCOM'ITANTLY. [L. _con_, with, and _comitans_, pr.p. of _comit[=a]ri_, to
accompany--_comes_, a companion.]

CONCORD, kon'kord, or kong'-, _n._ state of being of the same heart or
mind: union: harmony: agreement: a combination of notes which is pleasant
to the ear.--_v.i._ to agree: to harmonise.--_n._ CONCORD'ANCE, agreement:
an index or dictionary of the leading words or passages of a book, esp. of
the Bible.--_adj._ CONCORD'ANT, harmonious, united.--_adv._
CONCORD'ANTLY.--_n._ CONCORD'AT, a term, though sometimes used of secular
treaties, generally employed to denote an agreement made between the pope
and a secular government.--_adj._ CONCOR'DIAL, harmonious. [Fr.
_concorde_--L. _concordia_--_concors_, of the same heart, from _con_,
together, _cor_, _cordis_, the heart.]

CONCORPORATE, kon-kor'por-[=a]t, _v.t._ to unite in one body.--_adj._
united in one body. [L. _con_, together, and CORPORATE.]

CONCOURSE, kon'k[=o]rs, or kong'-, _n._ an assembly of persons or things
running or drawn together: (_Scots law_) concurrence of an officer, who has
legal right to grant it. [Fr.,--L. _concursus_--_con_, together,
_curr[)e]re_, to run.]

CONCREATE, kon'kr[=e]-[=a]t, _v.t._ to create with or at the same time.

CONCREMATION, kon-kr[=e]-m[=a]'shun, _n._ a burning up or together,
cremation.

CONCRESCENCE, kon-kres'ens, _n._ increment: a growing together of cells or
other organisms. [L. _concrescentia_--_con_, together, _cresc[)e]re_, to
grow.]

CONCRETE, kon'kr[=e]t, _adj._ formed into one mass: the opposite of
_abstract_, and denoting a particular thing: made of concrete.--_n._ a mass
formed by parts growing or sticking together: a mixture of lime, sand,
pebbles, &c., used in building.--_v.t._ CONCR[=E]TE', to form into a solid
mass.--_v.i._ to harden.--_adv._ CONCR[=E]TE'LY.--_ns._ CONCR[=E]TE'NESS;
CONCR[=E]'TION, a mass concreted: a growth forming in certain parts of the
body, as calculi, &c.--_adjs._ CONCR[=E]'TIONARY; CONCR[=E]T'IVE, having
power to concrete. [L. _concretus_--_con_, together, _cresc[)e]re_,
_cretum_, to grow.]

CONCREW, kon-kr[=oo]', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to concrete.

CONCUBINE, kong'k[=u]-b[=i]n, _n._ a woman who cohabits or lives with a man
without being married.--_n._ CONC[=U]'BINAGE, state of living together as
man and wife without being married.--_adj._ CONC[=U]'BINARY. [Fr.,--L.
_concubina_--_con_, together, _cub[=a]re_, to lie down.]

CONCUPISCENCE, kon-k[=u]'pis-ens, _n._ violent desire: sexual appetite:
lust.--_adjs._ CONC[=U]'PISCENT, CONC[=U]'PISCIBLE. [Fr.,--L.
_concupiscentia_--_concupisc[)e]re_--_con_, inten., _cup[)e]re_, to
desire.]

CONCUPY, kong'k[=u]-pi, _n._ (_Shak._) concubine, or concupiscence,
according to Schmidt.

CONCUR, kon-kur', _v.i._ to run together: to meet in one point: to
coincide: to act together: to agree: to assent to:--_pr.p._ concur'ring;
_pa.p._ concurred'.--_ns._ CONCUR'RENCE, the meeting of lines: union: joint
action: assent; CONCUR'RENCY.--_adj._ CONCUR'RENT, of lines meeting in the
same point: coming, acting, or existing together: united:
accompanying.--_n._ one that concurs: a competitor: one who accompanies a
sheriff's officer as witness.--_adv._ CONCUR'RENTLY.--_adj._ CONCUR'RING,
agreeing. [L. _concurr[)e]re_, from _con_, together, _curr[)e]re_,
_cursum_, to run.]

CONCUSS, kon-kus', _v.t._ to disturb: to overawe: to coerce.--_n._
CONCUS'SION, state of being shaken: a violent shock caused by the sudden
contact of two bodies: any undue pressure or force exerted upon any
one.--_adj._ CONCUSS'IVE, having the power or quality of concussion. [L.
_concussus_--_con_, together, _quat[)e]re_, to shake.]

CONCYCLIC, kon-s[=i]'klik, _adj._ (_geom._) lying on the circumference of
one circle.

CONDEMN, kon-dem', _v.t._ to pronounce guilty: to censure or blame: to
sentence to punishment: to give up to some fate: to pronounce unfit for
use.--_adj._ CONDEM'NABLE, blamable.--_n._ CONDEMN[=A]'TION, state of being
condemned: blame: cause of being condemned.--_adj._ CONDEM'NATORY,
expressing or implying condemnation.--_p.adj._ CONDEMNED', pronounced to be
wrong, guilty, or useless: belonging or relating to one who is sentenced to
punishment, e.g. 'condemned cell:' declared dangerous and to be removed, as
a house, bridge, &c. [L. _condemn[=a]re_, from _con_, inten., and
_damn[=a]re_, to damage.]

CONDENSE, kon-dens', _v.t._ to compress or reduce by pressure into smaller
compass: to reduce to a denser form, as vapour to liquid.--_n._
CONDENSABIL'ITY, the quality of being condensable.--_adj._ CONDENS'ABLE,
capable of being compressed.--_v.t._ CONDENS'[=A]TE, to condense: to
compress into a closer form.--_v.i._ to become dense: to harden:--_pr.p._
condens'[=a]ting; _pa.p._ condens'[=a]ted.--_ns._ CONDENS[=A]'TION, act of
condensing; CONDENS'ER, an apparatus for reducing vapours to a liquid form:
an appliance for collecting or condensing electricity. [L.
_condens[=a]re_--_con_, inten., and _densus_, dense.]

CONDESCEND, kon-de-send', _v.i._ to descend willingly from a superior
position: to act kindly to inferiors: to deign: to comply: to lower one's
self.--_n._ CONDESCEND'ENCE, condescension: (_Scots law_) an articulate
statement annexed to a summons, setting forth the allegations in fact upon
which an action is founded.--_adj._ CONDESCEND'ING, yielding to inferiors:
courteous: obliging: patronising.--_adv._ CONDESCEND'INGLY.--_n._
CONDESCENS'ION, affability to inferiors: courtesy:
graciousness.--CONDESCEND UPON, to specify: to mention. [L. _con_, inten.,
and _descend[)e]re_, to descend.]

CONDIDDLE, kon-did'l, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to steal.

CONDIGN, kon-d[=i]n', _adj._ well merited: adequate (of
punishment).--_adv._ CONDIGN'LY.--_n._ CONDIGN'NESS. [L.
_condignus_--_con_, wholly, _dignus_, worthy.]

CONDIMENT, kon'di-ment, _n._ a seasoning used at table to give a flavour to
the ordinary solid or liquid food.--_v.t._ to pickle. [L.
_condimentum_--_cond[=i]re_, to preserve, to pickle.]

CONDITION, kon-dish'un, _n._ state in which things exist: a particular
manner of being: quality: rank, as 'a person of condition:' pre-requisite:
temper: a term of a contract: proposal: arrangement: (_logic_) that which
must precede the operation of a cause: (_law_) a provision that upon the
occurrence of an uncertain event an obligation shall come into force, or
shall cease, or that the obligation shall not come into force until a
certain event.--_v.i._ to make terms.--_v.t._ to agree upon: to restrict,
limit: to determine.--_adj._ CONDI'TIONAL, depending on conditions.--_n._
CONDITIONAL'ITY.--_adv._ CONDI'TIONALLY.--_v.t._ CONDI'TIONATE, to
condition: to qualify.--_adj._ CONDI'TIONED, having a certain condition,
state, or quality: circumstanced: depending: relative--the opposite of
_absolute_.--CONDITIONING HOUSE, an establishment in which the true weight,
length, and condition of articles of trade and commerce are determined
scientifically--the first in England established at Bradford in 1891. [L.
_condicio_, _-nis_, a compact (later false spelling
_conditio_)--_condic[)e]re_--_con_, together, _dic[)e]re_, to say.]

CONDOLE, kon-d[=o]l', _v.i._ to grieve with another: to sympathise in
sorrow: (_Shak._) to grieve.--_adj._ CONDOL'ATORY, expressing
condolence.--_ns._ CONDOLE'MENT, CONDOL'ENCE, expression of grief for
another's sorrow.--_adj._ CONDOL'ENT, sympathetic. [L. _con_, with,
_dol[=e]re_, to grieve.]

CONDONE, kon-d[=o]n', _v.t._ to forgive: to pass over.--_n._
CONDON[=A]'TION, forgiveness: in the legal phraseology of Britain and the
United States, forgiveness granted by the injured party, which may be urged
by the guilty party as a defence against an action of divorce on the ground
of adultery. [L. _con_, inten., _don[=a]re_, to give. See DONATION.]

CONDOR, kon'dor, _n._ a large vulture found among the Andes of South
America. [Sp.,--Peruv. _cuntur_.]

CONDOTTIERE, kon-dot-ti-[=a]'re, _n._ a leader of a band of military
adventurers who sold their services to any party in any contest:--_pl._
CONDOTTIERI (-[=a]'r[=e]). [It.,--_condotto_, way--L. _con_, and
_duc[)e]re_, to lead.]

CONDUCE, kon-d[=u]s', _v.i._ to tend to some end: to contribute.--_ns._
CONDUCE'MENT (_Milt._), CONDUC'IBLENESS, CONDUC'IVENESS.--_adjs._
CONDUC'IBLE, CONDUC'IVE, leading or tending: having power to promote:
advantageous.--_advs._ CONDUC'IBLY, CONDUC'IVELY. [L. _con_, together,
_duc[)e]re_, _ductum_, to lead.]

CONDUCT, kon-dukt', _v.t._ to lead or guide: to convey (water): to direct:
to manage: to behave: (_elect._) to carry or transmit.--_ns._ CON'DUCT, act
or method of leading or managing: guidance: escort: guide: management:
behaviour; CONDUCTIBIL'ITY.--_adjs._ CONDUCT'IBLE, capable of conducting
heat, &c.: capable of being conducted or transmitted.--_n._ CONDUC'TION,
act or property of conducting or transmitting: transmission by a conductor,
as heat.--_adj._ CONDUCT'IVE, having the quality or power of conducting or
transmitting.--_ns._ CONDUCTIV'ITY, a power that bodies have of
transmitting heat and electricity; CONDUCT'OR, the person or thing that
conducts: a leader: a manager: a leader of an orchestra: one in charge of a
bus, &c.: that which has the property of transmitting electricity, heat,
&c.--_n.fem._ CONDUCT'RESS. [L. _conductus_--_conduc[)e]re_. See CONDUCE.]

CONDUIT, kun'dit, or kon'-, _n._ a channel or pipe to lead or convey water,
&c.: a kind of fountain. [Fr. _conduit_--L. _conductus_--_conduc[)e]re_, to
lead.]

CONDYLE, kon'dil, _n._ a protuberance at the end of a bone serving for
articulation with another bone, esp. that by which the occipital bone of
the skull is articulated to the spine.--_adj._ CON'DYLOID.--_n._
CONDYL[=O]'MA, a growth about the anus or generative organs.
[Fr.,--L.,--Gr. _kondylos_, knuckle.]

[Illustration]

CONE, k[=o]n, _n._ a solid pointed figure with a circular base: fruit
shaped like a cone, as that of the pine, fir, &c.: anything shaped like a
cone.--_ns._ CONE'-SHELL, a family of Gasteropod molluscs, with substantial
conical shells; CONE'-WHEAT, a variety of wheat, with conical-shaped
spike.--_adjs._ CONIC, -AL, having the form of or pertaining to a
cone.--_adv._ CON'ICALLY.--_ns._ CON'ICALNESS, CONIC'ITY.--_adj._
CON'ICO-CYLIN'DRICAL.--_n._ CON'ICS, that part of geometry which deals with
the cone and its sections.--_adj._ C[=O]'NIFORM, in the form of a
cone.--CONIC SECTION, a figure made by the section of a cone by a plane.
[Fr. _cone_--L.,--Gr. _k[=o]nos_, a peak, a peg.]

CONEY. See CONY.

CONFAB, kon-fab', _v._ and _n._ coll. forms of CONFAB'UL[=A]TE,
CONFABUL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CONFAB'ULAR.--_n._ CONFAB'UL[=A]TOR.--_adj._
CONFAB'UL[=A]TORY.

CONFABULATE, kon-fab'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.i._ to talk familiarly together: to
chat.--_n._ CONFABUL[=A]'TION. [L. _con_, together, _fabul[=a]ri_, to
talk--_fabula_, a tale, fable.]

CONFARREATION, kon-far-re-[=a]'shun, _n._ a Roman mode of marriage, made in
the presence of the high-priest and ten witnesses, at which bread made of
spelt was eaten together.--_adj._ CONFAR'REATE. [L.
_confarreatio_--_confarre[=a]re_, to unite by bread, to marry--_con_, with,
_far_, a species of grain.]

CONFECT, kon'fekt, _n._ fruit, &c., prepared with sugar: a sweetmeat: a
comfit.--_v.t._ CONFECT', to prepare: to preserve.--_n._ CONFEC'TION,
composition, compound: a composition of drugs: a sweetmeat: the French word
for a ready-made article of dress for women's wear.--_v.t._ to make a
confection, in its various uses.--_ns._ CONFEC'TIONARY (_B._), a
confectioner: a sweetmeat: a place where confections are made:
confectionery; CONFEC'TIONER, one who makes confections; CONFEC'TIONERY, a
confectioner's shop: the business of a confectioner: sweetmeats in general.
[L. _confic[)e]re_, _confectum_, to make up together--_con_, together,
_fac[)e]re_, to make.]

CONFEDERATE, kon-fed'[.e]r-[=a]t, _adj._ leagued together: allied.--_n._
one united in a league: an ally: an acomplice.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ to league
together or join in a league.--_ns._ CONFED'ERACY, a league or mutual
engagement: persons or states united by a league: a conspiracy;
CONFEDER[=A]'TION, a league: alliance, esp. of princes, states, &c.--_adj._
CONFED'ER[=A]TIVE, of or belonging to a confederation. [L.
_confoeder[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_, together, _foedus_, _foed[)e]ris_, a
league.]

CONFER, kon-f[.e]r', _v.t._ to give or bestow: to compare (notes),
collate--abbrev. CF.--_v.i._ to talk or consult together:--_pr.p._
confer'ring; _pa.p._ conferred'.--_ns._ CONFEREE', one conferred with;
CON'FERENCE, the act of conferring: an appointed meeting for instruction or
discussion.--_adjs._ CONFEREN'TIAL; CONFER'RABLE.--_n._ CONFER'RER, one who
confers. [Fr.,--L. _conferre_--_con_, together, _ferre_, to bring.]

CONFERVA, kon-f[.e]r'va, _n._ a genus of lower fresh-water Algæ, forming
slimy masses or tufts in ponds and stagnent pools, easily recognised by
their unbranched filaments.--_adj._ CONFER'VOID. [L. _conferva_, a kind
water-plant.]

CONFESS, kon-fes', _v.t._ to acknowledge fully, esp. something wrong: to
own or admit: to make known, as sins to a priest: to hear a confession, as
a priest.--_v.i._ to make confession.--_ns._ CONFES'SION, acknowledgment of
a crime or fault: avowal; a statement of one's religious belief:
acknowledgment of sin to a priest; CONFES'SIONAL, the seat or enclosed
recess where a priest hears confessions.--_adj._ pertaining to
confession.--_ns._ CONFES'SIONALISM; CONFES'SIONALIST.--_adj._
CONFES'SIONARY, of or belonging to confession.--_n._ a confessional.--_ns._
CONFESS'OR, one who professes the Christian faith, or a priest who hears
confessions and grants absolution: one who endures persecution but not
death:--_fem._ CONFESS'ORESS; CONFESS'ORSHIP.--_adjs._ CONFESSED',
CONFEST', admitted: avowed: evident.--_advs._ CONFESS'EDLY,
CONFEST'LY.--CONFESSION OF FAITH, a formulary embodying the religious
beliefs of a church or sect: a creed.--CONFESS TO, to admit, acknowledge;
STAND CONFESSED, to be revealed. [Fr. _confesser_--L. _confit[=e]ri_,
_confessus_--_con_, sig. completeness, and _fat[=e]ri_--_f[=a]ri_, to
speak.]

CONFIDE, kon-f[=i]d', _v.i._ to trust wholly or have faith (with _in_): to
rely.--_v.t._ to entrust, or commit to the charge of.--_ns._ CONFIDANT',
one confided in or entrusted with secrets: a bosom-friend:--_fem._
CONFIDANTE'; CON'FIDENCE, firm trust or belief: faith: self-reliance:
firmness: boldness: presumption; CON'FIDENCY.--_adj._ CON'FIDENT, trusting
firmly: having full belief: positive: bold.--_n._ a confidential
friend.--_adj._ CONFIDEN'TIAL, (given) in confidence: admitted to
confidence: private.--_advs._ CONFIDEN'TIALLY; CON'FIDENTLY.--_n._
CONFID'ER, one who confides.--_adj._ CONFID'ING, trustful.--_adv._
CONFID'INGLY.--_n._ CONFID'INGNESS.--CONFIDENCE TRICK, a swindler's trick,
whereby a person is induced to hand over money as a mark of confidence in
the swindler; CONFIDANT PERSON, in Scots law, a confidential person,
partner, agent, &c. [L. _confid[)e]re_--_con_, sig. completeness, and
_fid[)e]re_, to trust.]

CONFIGURATION, kon-fig-[=u]-r[=a]'shun, _n._ external figure or shape:
outline: relative position or aspect, as of planets.--_vs.t._ CONFIG'URATE,
CONFIG'URE, to shape. [L. _configuratio_--_con_, together, and
_figur[=a]re_, to form. See FIGURE.]

CONFINE, kon'f[=i]n, _n._ border, boundary, or limit--generally in _pl._:
(kon-f[=i]n') confinement: (_Shak._) a prison.--_v.t._ CONFINE', to border;
to be adjacent to: to limit, enclose: to imprison.--_adjs._ CONFIN'-ABLE;
CONFINED', limited: imprisoned: narrow; CONFINE'LESS (_Shak._), without
bound: unlimited.--_ns._ CONFINE'MENT, state of being shut up: restraint:
imprisonment: restraint from going abroad by sickness, and esp. of women in
childbirth; CONFIN'ER. one within the confines: (_Shak._) an
inhabitant.--_adj._ CONFIN'ING, bordering: limiting.--BE CONFINED, to be
limited: to be in child-bed. [Fr. _confiner_--L. _confinis_,
bordering--_con_, together, _finis_, the end.]

CONFIRM, kon-f[.e]rm', _v.t._ to strengthen: to fix or establish: to
ratify: to verify: to assure: to admit to full communion.--_adj._
CONFIRM'ABLE.--_n._ CONFIRM[=A]'TION, a making firm or sure: convincing
proof: the rite by which persons are admitted to full communion in the
R.C., Greek, Lutheran, Anglican, and other Churches.--_adjs._
CONFIRM'ATIVE, tending to confirm; CONFIRM'ATORY, giving additional
strength to: confirming; CONFIRMED', settled: inveterate.--_ns._
CONFIRMEE', one to whom anything is confirmed; CONFIRM'ER; CONFIRM'ING. [O.
Fr. _confermer_--L. _confirm[=a]re_--_con_, inten., and
_firm[=a]re_--_firmus_, firm.]

CONFISCATE, kon'fis-k[=a]t, or kon-fis'-, _v.t._ to appropriate to the
state, as a penalty: to take possession of.--_adj._ forfeited to the public
treasury.--_adjs._ CONFIS'CABLE, CONFIS'CATORY, of the nature of
confiscation.--_ns._ CONFISC[=A]'TION, the act of confiscating;
CON'FISC[=A]TOR, one who confiscates. [L. _confisc[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_con_, together, _fiscus_, a basket.]

CONFIT, kon'fit, _n._ (_obs._). Same as COMFIT.

CONFITEOR, kon-fit'[=e]-or, _n._ a form of prayer or confession used in the
Latin Church. [L. _confiteor_, I confess.]

CONFITURE, kon'fit-[=u]r, _n._ (_obs._). Same as COMFITURE.

CONFIX, kon-fiks', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to fix firmly. [L. _config[)e]re_,
_-fixum_--_con_, inten., _fig[)e]re_, to fix.]

CONFLAGRATE, kon'fla-gr[=a]t, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to burn up.--_adj._
CONFLAG'RANT (_Milt._) burning.--_n._ CONFLAGR[=A]'TION, a great burning or
fire. [L. _conflagr[=a]re_--_con_, inten., and _flagr[=a]re_, to burn. See
FLAGRANT.]

CONFLATE, kon-fl[=a]t', _v.t._ to blow together: to produce: to combine two
variant readings of a text into one.--_n._ CONFL[=A]'TION. [L.
_conflatus_--_confl[=a]re_, to blow together--_con_, and _fl[=a]re_, to
blow.]

CONFLICT, kon'flikt, _n._ violent collision: a struggle or contest: a
battle: a mental struggle.--_v.i._ CONFLICT', to fight: contend: to be in
opposition: to clash.--_adj._ CONFLICT'ING, clashing: contradictory.--_n._
CONFLIC'TION.--_adj._ CONFLICT'IVE, tending to conflict. [L.
_conflig[)e]re_--_con_, together, and _flig[)e]re_, to strike.]

CONFLUENCE, kon'floo-ens, _n._ a flowing together: the place of meeting, as
of rivers: a concourse: the act of meeting together.--_adj._ CON'FLUENT,
flowing together: uniting.--_n._ a stream uniting and flowing with
another.--_adv._ CON'FLUENTLY.--_n._ CON'FLUX, a flowing together. [L.
_conflu[)e]re_, _confluxum_, from _con_, together, _flu[)e]re_, to flow.]

CONFORM, kon-form', _v.t._ to make like or of the same form with: to
adapt.--_v.i._ to be of the same form; to comply: to obey.--_n._
CONFORMABIL'ITY, state of being conformable.--_adj._ CONFORM'ABLE,
corresponding in form: suitable: compliant.--_adv._ CONFORM'ABLY.--_ns._
CONFORM[=A]'TION, particular form, shape, or structure: adaptation;
CONFORM'ER, CONFORM'IST, one who conforms, esp. with the worship of the
Established Church; CONFORM'ITY, likeness: compliance: consistency.--IN
CONFORMITY WITH, in accordance with. [L. _conform[=a]re_--_con_, with, and
_form[=a]re_--_forma_, form.]

CONFOUND, kon-fownd', _v.t._ to overthrow, defeat: to mingle so as to make
the parts indistinguishable: to throw into disorder: to perplex: to
astonish.--_p.adj._ CONFOUND'ED, confused: astonished: (_coll._)
consummate, egregious (a term of disapprobation).--_advs._ CONFOUND'EDLY
(_coll._), hatefully, shamefully: cursedly; CONFOUND'INGLY,
astonishingly.--CONFOUND YOU, an execration or curse. [O. Fr.
_confondre_--L. _confund[)e]re_, _-fusum_--_con_, together, _fund[)e]re_,
to pour.]

CONFRATERNITY, kon-fra-t[.e]r'ni-ti, _n._ a brotherhood: clan: brotherly
friendship.

CONFRÈRE, kong-fr[=a]r, _n._ a colleague: a fellow-member or associate.
[Fr.,--L. _con_, together, _frater_, a brother.]

CONFRONT, kon-frunt', _v.t._ to stand in front of: to face: to oppose: to
bring face to face: to compare.--_n._ CONFRONT[=A]'TION, the bringing of
people face to face. [Fr. _confronter_--Low L.,--L. _con_, together, and
_frons_, the front. See FRONT.]

CONFUCIAN, kon-f[=u]'shyan, _adj._ of or belonging to _Confucius_, the
Chinese philosopher (551-479 B.C.).--_ns._ CONF[=U]'CIANISM;
CONF[=U]'CIANIST.

CONFUSE, kon-f[=u]z', _v.t._ to pour or mix together so that things cannot
be distinguished: to throw into disorder: to perplex.--_v.i._ to be
confused.--_adj._ CONFUSED', perplexed: disordered.--_adv._ CONFUS'EDLY, in
a confused manner: disorderly.--_ns._ CONFUS'EDNESS, state of being
confused: disorder; CONF[=U]'SION, the state of being confused: disorder:
shame: overthrow: perplexity: embarrassment: turmoil.--_adj._
CONF[=U]'SIVE. [A doublet of CONFOUND.]

CONFUTE, kon-f[=u]t', _v.t._ to prove to be false: to refute: to put an end
to.--_adj._ CONF[=U]T'ABLE.--_n._ CONFUT[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CONF[=U]T'ATIVE,
tending to confute.--_n._ CONFUTE'MENT. [L. _confut[=a]re_--_con_, inten.,
and _futis_, a water-vessel, from _fund[)e]re_, to pour: to overthrow. See
FUTILE.]

CONGÉ. See CONGEE.

CONGEAL, kon-j[=e]l', _v.t._ to freeze: to change from fluid to solid by
cold: to solidify, as by cold.--_v.i._ to pass from fluid to solid, as by
cold: to stiffen: to coagulate.--_adj._ CONGEAL'ABLE.--_ns._
CONGEAL'ABLENESS; CONGEAL'MENT, CONGEL[=A]'TION, act or process of
congealing: anything congealed. [L. _congel[=a]re_, from _con_, and _gelu_,
frost.]

CONGEE, kon'j[=e], CONGÉ, kong'j[=a], _n._ a bow: dismissal: leave to
depart.--_v.i._ to take leave: to bow.--CONGÉ D'ÉLIRE (_Fr._), permission
to elect: permission given by the crown to a dean and chapter to elect a
bishop. [Fr. _congé_--L. _commeatus_, leave of absence--_com_, together,
and _me[=a]re_, to go.]

CONGENER, kon'je-n[.e]r, or kon-j[=e]'n[.e]r, _n._ a person or thing of the
same kind or nature.--_adj._ akin.--_adjs._ CONGENER'IC, -AL, of the same
genus, origin, or nature; CONGEN'EROUS, of the same nature or kind;
CONGENET'IC, alike in origin. [L.,--_con_, with, and _genus_, _generis_,
kind.]

CONGENIAL, kon-j[=e]'ni-al, _adj._ of the same genius, spirit, or tastes:
kindred, sympathetic: suitable.--_n._ CONGENIAL'ITY.--_adv._
CONG[=E]'NIALLY. [L. _con_, with, and _genialis_, genial. See GENIAL.]

CONGENITAL, kon-jen'i-tal, _adj._ begotten or born with, said of diseases
or deformities dating from birth.--_adv._ CONGEN'ITALLY. [L. _congenitus_,
from _con_, together, _gign[)e]re_, _genitum_, to beget.]

CONGER, kong'g[.e]r, _n._ a marine bony fish in the eel family, 3 to 6 feet
long--also CON'GER-EEL: a company of co-operating booksellers. [L.,--Gr.
_gongros_.]

CONGERIES, kon-j[=e]'ri-[=e]z, _n._ a collection of particles or small
bodies in one mass. [L.,--_con_, together, _ger[)e]re_, _gestum_, to
bring.]

CONGEST, kon-jest', _v.t._ to bring together, or heap up: to
accumulate.--_adjs._ CONGEST'ED, affected with an unnatural accumulation of
blood: overcrowded; CONGEST'IBLE.--_n._ CONGEST'ION, an accumulation of
blood in any part of the body: fullness: an overcrowded condition.--_adj._
CONGEST'IVE, indicating or tending to congestion. [L. _conger[)e]re_,
_congestum_--_con_, together, and _ger[)e]re_, _gestum_, to bring.]

CONGIARY, kon'ji-ar-i, _n._ a gift to the Roman people or soldiery,
originally in corn, oil, &c., each receiving a _congius_ or
gallon--afterwards given in money. [L. _congiarium_--_congius_, the Roman
gallon.]

CONGLOBE, kon-gl[=o]b', _v.t._ or _v.i._ to collect together into a globe
or round mass:--_pr.p._ congl[=o]b'ing; _pa.p._ congl[=o]bed'.--_adj._
CONGLOB'ATE, formed into a globe or ball.--_v.t._ to form into a globe or
ball.--_n._ CONGLOB[=A]'TION.--_v.i._ CONGLOB'[=U]LATE, to gather into a
globule or small globe. [L. _con_, together, and _glob[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_globus_, a ball, globe.]

CONGLOMERATE, kon-glom'[.e]r-[=a]t, _adj._ gathered into a clew or
mass.--_v.t._ to gather into a ball.--_n._ a rock composed of pebbles
cemented together.--_n._ CONGLOMER[=A]'TION, state of being conglomerated:
a collection of things. [L. _conglomer[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_, together,
and _glomus_, _glomeris_, a clew, akin to _globus_.]

CONGLUTINATE, kon-gl[=oo]'tin-[=a]t, _v.t._ to glue together: to heal by
uniting.--_v.i._ to unite or grow together.--_p.adj._ CONGLU'TINANT.--_n._
CONGLUTIN[=A]'TION, a joining by means of some sticky substance:
healing.--_adj._ CONGLU'TIN[=A]TIVE, having power to conglutinate.--_n._
CONGLU'TIN[=A]TOR. [L. _conglutin[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_, together, and
_gluten_, glue.]

CONGOU, kong'g[=oo], _n._ a kind of black tea.--Also CONGO. [Chinese
_kung-fu_, labour, referring to the labour expended in producing the tea.]

CONGRATULATE, kon-grat'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to wish joy to on any fortunate
event: to felicitate: to consider one's self fortunate in some
matter.--_adj._ CONGRAT'ULANT, expressing congratulation.--_n._ a
congratulator.--_ns._ CONGRATUL[=A]'TION, act of congratulating: an
expression of joy or sympathy; CONGRAT'ULATOR.--_adj._ CONGRAT'ULATORY. [L.
_congratul[=a]ri_, _-[=a]tus_--_con_, inten., _gratul[=a]ri_--_gratus_,
pleasing.]

CONGREE, kon-gr[=e]', _v.i._ (_Shak._) to agree together: to accord. [L.
_con_, together, and Fr. _gré_, good-will--L. _gratus_, pleasing.]

CONGREET, kon-gr[=e]t', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to salute mutually. [L. _con_,
together, and GREET.]

CONGREGATE, kong'gre-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to gather together: to
assemble.--_v.i._ to flock together.--_p.adj._ CONGREGAT'ED, assembled:
aggregated.--_n._ CONGREG[=A]'TION, the act of congregating: an assemblage
of persons or things: (_O.T._) a name given to the children of Israel: a
body of people united to worship in a particular church: the name given to
the body of Protestant Reformers in Scotland in the time of Mary.--_adj._
CONGREG[=A]'TIONAL, pertaining to a congregation.--_ns._
CONGREG[=A]'TIONALISM, a form of church government in which each
congregation is independent in the management of its own affairs--also
called _Independency_; CONGREG[=A]'TIONALIST, adherent of
Congregationalism. [L. _congreg[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_, together, and
_grex_, _gregis_, a flock.]

CONGRESS, kong'gres, _n._ a meeting together or assembly, as of
ambassadors, &c., for political purposes: the federal legislature of the
United States.--_v.i._ to meet in congress.--_adj._ CONGRES'SIONAL.--_n._
CON'GRESSMAN, a member of congress. [L. _con_, together, and _gradi_,
_gressus_, to step, to go.]

CONGREVE, kong'gr[=e]v, _n._ a rocket for use in war, invented by Sir
William _Congreve_ (1772-1828).--_n._ CON'GREVE-MATCH, a kind of lucifer
match, invented by Congreve.

CONGRUE, kong-gr[=oo]', _v.i._ (_Shak._) to agree.--_ns._ CONG'RUENCE,
CONG'RUENCY, agreement: suitableness.--_adj._ CONG'RUENT, agreeing:
suitable: congruous: used of two numbers which, when divided by the same
number, give the same remainder.--_n._ CONGRU'ITY, agreement between
things: consistency: fitness.--_adj._ CONG'RUOUS, suitable: fit:
consistent.--_adv._ CONG'RUOUSLY.--_n._ CONG'RUOUSNESS. [L. _congru[)e]re_,
to run together.]

CONIA. See CONIUM.

CONIC, -AL; CONICS. See CONE.

CONIFERÆ, kon-if'[.e]r-[=e], _n.pl._ an order of exogenous plants,
including pines, firs, &c., which bear cones, in which the seed is
contained.--_n._ CON'IFER, one of the foregoing.--_adj._ CONIF'EROUS,
cone-bearing, as the fir, &c. [CONE, and L. _ferre_, to bear.]

CONIFORM. See CONE.

CONIMA, kon'i-ma, _n._ a fragrant resin for making pastilles.

CONINE, k[=o]'nin, _n._ an alkaloid forming the poisonous principle of
hemlock.--Also C[=O]'NIA, C[=O]'NICINE. [Gr. _k[=o]neion_, hemlock.]

CONIROSTRAL, k[=o]n-i-ros'tral, _adj._ having a strong conical
beak.--_n.pl._ CONIROS'TRES, a group of insessorial birds with such. [CONE,
and L. _rostralis_--_rostrum_, a beak.]

CONJECT, kon-jekt', _v.i._ (_Shak._) to conjecture.

CONJECTURE, kon-jekt'[=u]r, _n._ a forecast: an opinion formed on slight or
defective evidence: an opinion without proof: a guess: an idea.--_v.t._ to
make conjectures regarding: to infer on slight evidence: to guess.--_adjs._
CONJECT'URABLE, that may be conjectured; CONJECT'URAL, involving
conjecture: given to conjecture.--_adv._ CONJECT'URALLY. [L.
_conjic[)e]re_, _conjectum_, to throw together--_con_, together, and
_jac[)e]re_, to throw.]

CONJEE, CONGEE, kon'j[=e], _n._ water in which rice has been boiled, much
used for invalids. [Anglo-Indian--Tamil _kañji_. Origin unknown.]

CONJOIN, kon-join', _v.t._ to join together: to combine.--_v.i._ to
unite.--_adjs._ CONJOINED', united: in conjunction; CONJOINT', joined
together: united.--_adv._ CONJOINT'LY. [Fr. _conjoindre_--L. _con_,
together, and _jung[)e]re_, _junctum_, to join. See JOIN.]

CONJUGAL, kon'joo-gal, _adj._ pertaining to marriage.--_n._
CONJUGAL'ITY.--_adv._ CON'JUGALLY. [L. _conjugalis_--_conjux_, one united
to another, a husband or wife--_con_, and _jugum_, a yoke.]

CONJUGATE, kon'joo-g[=a]t, _v.t._ (_gram._) to give the various inflections
or parts of a verb.--_adj._ joined: connected.--_n._ a word agreeing in
derivation with another word.--_adjs._ CON'JUGATED, CONJUG[=A]'TIONAL,
CON'JUGATIVE, conjugate.--_ns._ CON'JUGATENESS; CON'JUGATING;
CONJUG[=A]'TION, the act of joining: union: (_gram._) a term applied to a
connected view or statement of the inflectional changes of form that a verb
undergoes in its various relations: a class of verbs inflected in the same
manner.--CONJUGATE AXES, two axes in a conic section, such that each is
parallel to the tangent at the extremity of the other; CONJUGATE FOCI (see
FOCUS); CONJUGATE MIRRORS, two mirrors set face to face so that the rays
emitted from the focus of one are first reflected from it to the and thence
to its focus; CONJUGATION OF CELLS, a mode of reproduction in which two
apparently similar cells unite, as in Amoeba, Diatoms, &c. [L.
_conjug[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_, together, and _jug[=a]re_--_jugum_, a
yoke.]

CONJUNCT, kon-junkt', _adj._ conjoined: concurrent.--_n._ CONJUNC'TION,
connection, union: (_gram._) a word that connects sentences, clauses, and
words: one of the aspects of the planets, when two heavenly bodies have the
same longitude--i.e. when the same perpendicular to the ecliptic passes
through both.--_adj._ CONJUNC'TIONAL, relating to a conjunction.--_adv._
CONJUNC'TIONALLY.--_adj._ CONJUNC'TIVE, closely united: serving to unite:
connective: (_gram._) introduced by a conjunction.--_adv._
CONJUNC'TIVELY.--_n._ CONJUNC'TIVENESS.--_adv._ CONJUNC'TLY, conjointly: in
union.--_n._ CONJUNC'TURE, combination of circumstances: important
occasion, crisis.--GRAND CONJUNCTIONS, those where several planets or stars
are found together. [L.,--_conjung[)e]re_. See CONJOIN.]

CONJURE, kun'j[.e]r and kon-j[=oo]r' (_con'jure_, generally of the art of
legerdemain, &c.; _conjure'_, of actions treated as religious or solemn),
_v.i._ to practise magical arts: to make an invocation: (_obs._) to
conspire.--_v.t._ to call on or summon by a sacred name or in a solemn
manner: to implore earnestly: to compel (a spirit) by incantations: to
enchant: to raise up or frame needlessly; to effect by jugglery:--_pr.p._
con'juring; _pa.p._ con'jured.--_ns._ CONJUR[=A]'TION, act of summoning by
a sacred name or solemnly: enchantment; CON'JUR[=A]TOR, a conspirator;
CONJURE'MENT, adjuration; CON'JURER, -OR, one who practises magic: an
enchanter: (kon-j[=oo]'ror) one bound by oath with others; CON'JURING,
magic-working: the production of effects apparently miraculous by natural
means; CON'JURY, magic. [Fr.,--L. _con_, together, and _jur[=a]re_, to
swear.]

CONK, kongk, _n._ the nose.--_n._ CONK'Y (_slang_), a person with a large
nose. [Mr F. Hindes Groome suggests that it may be back slang, _conk_ being
the illiterate spelling of the Gipsy _knoc_, nose.]

CONNASCENT, kon-nas'ent, _adj._ born or produced at the same time.--_ns._
CONNAS'CENCE, CONNAS'CENCY. [L. _con_, with _nasci_, to be born.]

CONNATE, kon'[=a]t, _adj._ born with one's self: innate: allied:
congenial.--_adj._ CONNAT'URAL, of the same nature with another.--_v.t._
CONNAT'URALISE.--_n._ CONNAT'URALITY.--_adv._ CONNAT'URALLY.--_ns._
CONNAT'URALNESS; CONN[=A]'TURE. [L. _con_, with, and _nasci_, _natus_, to
be born.]

CONNE, kon, _v.t._ (_Spens._) form of CON, to know.

CONNECT, kon-ekt', _v.t._ to tie or fasten together: to establish a
relation between: to associate.--_p.adj._ CONNECT'ED, joined:
united.--_adv._ CONNECT'EDLY, in a connected manner.--_ns._ CONNECT'ER,
-OR, one who or that which connects.--_adj._ CONNECT'IBLE, capable of being
connected.--_ns._ CONNEC'TION, CONNEX'ION, act of connecting: that which
connects: a body or society held together by a bond: coherence:
intercourse: context: relation: intimacy: a relative.--_adjs._ CONNECT'IVE,
CONNEX'IVE (_obs._), binding together.--_n._ a word that connects sentences
and words.--_adv._ CONNECT'IVELY.--CONNECTIVE TISSUE, one of the four sets
of the commonest classification of animal tissues, including a great
variety--e.g. bone, cartilage, ligaments, and enswathing membranes. [L.
_con_, together, and _nect[)e]re_, to tie.]

CONNICTATION, kon-ik-t[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of winking. [L. _con_, and
_nictare_, _-[=a]tum_, to wink.]

CONNIVE, kon-[=i]v', _v.i._ to wink at a fault: to take no notice: to have
a private understanding.--_ns._ CONNIV'ANCE, CONNIV'ANCY, CONNIV'ENCE,
CONNIV'ENCY.--_adj._ CONNIV'ENT.--_n._ CONNIV'ER. [Fr.,--L. _conniv[=e]re_,
to wink.]

CONNOISSEUR, kon-es-sehr', or kon-is-[=u]r', _n._ one who knows a subject
well; a critical judge in art, music, &c.--_n._ CONNOISSEUR'SHIP, the skill
of a connoisseur. [Fr. _connoître_--L. _cognosc[)e]re_, to know.]

CONNOTE, kon-[=o]t', _v.t._ to signify secondarily: to imply along with an
object the inherent attributes: to include.--_v.t._ CON'NOT[=A]TE, to
connote.--_n._ CONNOT[=A]'TION, implication of something more than the
denotation of an object: the aggregation of attributes connoted by a
term.--_adjs._ CONNOT'[=A]TIVE, CONN[=O]'TIVE. [L. _con_, with, and NOTE.]

CONNUBIAL, kon-[=u]'bi-al, _adj._ pertaining to marriage or to the marriage
state: nuptial.--_n._ CONNUBIAL'ITY.--_adv._ CONN[=U]'BIALLY. [L. _con_,
and _nub[)e]re_, to marry. See NUPTIAL.]

CONNUMERATE, kon-n[=u]'me-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to count conjointly.--_n._
CONNUMER[=A]'TION.

CONNUSANCE, kon'[=u]-sans, _n._ an obs. form of COGNISANCE.

CONOID, k[=o]n'oid, _n._ anything like a cone in form.--_adjs._ CONOID'IC,
-AL, CON'OID, CONOID'AL. [Gr. _k[=o]nos_, a cone, _eidos_, form.]

CO-NOMINEE, k[=o]-nom-i-n[=e]', _n._ a joint-nominee.

CONQUADRATE, kon-kwod'r[=a]t, _v.t._ to square with another.

CONQUASSATE, kon-kwas'[=a]t, _v.t._ to shake.

CONQUER, kong'k[.e]r, _v.t._ to gain by force or with an effort: to
overcome or vanquish.--_v.i._ to be victor.--_adj._ CON'QUERABLE, that may
be conquered.--_n._ CON'QUERABLENESS.--_adj._ CON'QUERING,
victorious.--_adv._ CON'QUERINGLY.--_ns._ CON'QUEROR, one who conquers: a
victor:--_fem._ CON'QUERESS; CON'QUEST, the act of conquering: that which
is conquered or acquired by physical or moral force: the act of gaining the
affections of another.--MAKE A CONQUEST, to conquer.--THE CONQUEROR,
William I. of England (L. CONQUES'TOR); THE CONQUEST, the acquisition of
the throne of England by William, Duke of Normandy, in 1066. [O. Fr.
_conquerre_--L. _conquir[)e]re_,--_con_, inten., _quær[)e]re_, to seek.]

CONQUISTADOR, kong-kwis'ta-d[=o]r, _n._ a conqueror, applied to the
conquerors of Mexico and Peru. [Sp.,--L. _conquir[)e]re_. See CONQUER.]

CONSANGUINE, kon-sang'gwin, _adj._ related by blood: of the same family or
descent--also CONSANGUIN'EOUS.--_n._ CONSANGUIN'ITY, relationship by blood:
opposed to affinity or relationship by marriage. [L.
_consanguineus_--_con_, with, _sanguis_, blood.]

CONSCIENCE, kon'shens, _n._ the knowledge of our own acts and feelings as
right or wrong: sense of duty: scrupulousness: (_Shak._) understanding: the
faculty or principle by which we distinguish right from wrong.--_adjs._
CON'SCIENCE-PROOF, unvisited by any compunctions of conscience;
CON'SCIENCE-SMIT'TEN, stung by conscience; CONSCIEN'TIOUS, regulated by a
regard to conscience: scrupulous.--_adv._ CONSCIEN'TIOUSLY.--_n._
CONSCIEN'TIOUSNESS.--_adj._ CON'SCIONABLE, governed or regulated by
conscience.--_n._ CON'SCIONABLENESS.--_adv._ CON'SCIONABLY.--CONSCIENCE
CLAUSE, a clause in a law, affecting religious matters, to relieve persons
of conscientious scruples, esp. one to prevent their children being
compelled to undergo particular religious instruction; CONSCIENCE MONEY,
money given to relieve the conscience, by discharging a claim previously
evaded; CASE OF CONSCIENCE, a question in casuistry.--GOOD, or BAD,
CONSCIENCE, an approving or reproving conscience.--IN ALL CONSCIENCE,
certainly: (_coll._) by all that is right and fair.--MAKE A MATTER OF
CONSCIENCE, to act according to conscience: to have scruples about.--MY
CONSCIENCE! a vulgar exclamation of astonishment, or an
asseveration.--SPEAK ONE'S CONSCIENCE (_Shak._), to speak frankly: to give
one's opinion. [Fr.,--L. _conscientia_, knowledge--_consc[=i]re_, to know
well--_con_, and _sc[=i]re_, to know.]

CONSCIOUS, kon'shus, _adj._ having the feeling or internal knowledge of
something: aware: having the faculty of consciousness.--_adv._
CON'SCIOUSLY.--_n._ CON'SCIOUSNESS, the waking state of the mind: the
knowledge which the mind has of its own acts and feelings: thought. [L.
_conscius_--_consc[=i]re_, to know.]

CONSCRIBE, kon-'skr[=i]b', _v.t._ to enlist by conscription.--_adj._
CON'SCRIPT, enrolled, registered.--_n._ one enrolled and liable to serve as
a soldier or sailor.--_v.t._ to enlist.--_n._ CONSCRIP'TION, a compulsory
enrolment for naval or military service: the obtaining recruits by
compulsion.--_adj._ CONSCRIP'TIONAL.--CONSCRIPT FATHERS (_patres
conscripti_), the senators of ancient Rome. [L. _conscrib[)e]re_, to
enrol--_con_, together, _scrib[)e]re_, to write.]

CONSECRATE, kon'se-kr[=a]t, _v.t._ to set apart for a holy use: to render
holy or venerable; to hallow; to devote.--_adj._ consecrated: devoted:
sanctified.--_ns._ CON'SECRATEDNESS; CONSECR[=A]'TION, the act of devoting
to a sacred use; CON'SECRATOR.--_adj._ CON'SECRATORY, making sacred. [L.
_consecr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to make wholly sacred--_con_, and
_sacr[=a]re_, to set apart as sacred--_sacer_, sacred.]

CONSECTANEOUS, kon-sek-t[=a]'n[=e]-us, _adj._ following as a natural
consequence.

CONSECTARY, kon-sek'ta-ri, _n._ a deduction, corollary. [L.
_consect[=a]ri_, freq. of _consequi_. See CONSECUTION.]

CONSECUTION, kon-se-k[=u]'shun, _n._ a train of consequences or deductions:
a series of things that follow one another: (_mus._) succession of similar
intervals in harmony.--_adj._ CONSEC'UTIVE, following in regular order:
succeeding or resulting.--_adv._ CONSEC'UTIVELY--_n._ CONSEC'UTIVENESS. [L.
_consequi_--_con_, and _sequi_, _secutus_, to follow.]

CONSENESCENCE, kon-s[=e]-nes'ens, _n._ the state of growing old.--Also
CONSENES'CENCY.

CONSENSUS, kon-sen'sus, _n._ agreement of various parts: agreement in
opinion: unanimity.--_n._ CONSEN'SION, mutual consent.--_adj._ CONSEN'SUAL,
relating to consent.--_adv._ CONSEN'SUALLY.--CONSENSUAL CONTRACT, a
contract requiring merely the consent of the parties. [L. _consent[=i]re_.
See CONSENT.]

CONSENT, kon-sent', _v.i._ to be of the same mind: to agree: to give
assent: to yield: to comply.--_v.t._ (_Milt._) to allow.--_n._ agreement:
accordance with the actions or opinions of another: concurrence: advice,
counsel.--_adj._ CONSENT[=A]'NEOUS, agreeable or accordant: consistent
with.--_adv._ CONSENT[=A]'NEOUSLY--_ns._ CONSENT[=A]'NEOUSNESS,
CONSENTAN[=E]'ITY.--_n._ CONSEN'TIENCE, state of being consentient:
imperfect consciousness.--_adj._ CONSEN'TIENT, agreeing in mind or in
opinion.--_adv._ CONSENT'INGLY.--AGE OF CONSENT, the age at which a person
is considered in the eyes of the law competent to give consent to certain
acts; BE OF CONSENT (_Shak._), to be accessory; WITH ONE CONSENT,
unanimously. [L. _consent[=i]re_--_con_, with, _sent[=i]re_, to feel, to
think.]

CONSEQUENCE, kon'se-kwens, _n._ that which follows or comes after as a
result: effect: influence: importance: (_pl._) a round game describing the
meeting of a lady and gentleman and its consequences, each player in turn
writing a part of the story, not knowing what the others have
written.--_v.i._ (_Milt._) to draw inferences.--_adj._ CON'SEQUENT,
following as a natural effect or deduction.--_n._ that which follows: the
natural effect of a cause.--_adj._ CONSEQUEN'TIAL, following as a result:
casual: pompous.--_advs._ CONSEQUEN'TIALLY; CON'SEQUENTLY. [Fr.,--L.
_consequi_--_con_, together, and _sequi_, to follow.]

CONSERTION, kon-ser'shun, _n._ junction, adaptation.

CONSERVE, kon-s[.e]rv', _v.t._ to keep entire: to retain: to preserve:
(_obs._) to preserve in sugar.--_n._ something preserved, as fruits in
sugar.--_adj._ CONSER'VABLE.--_n._ CONSER'VANCY, a court having authority
to preserve the fisheries, &c., on a river: the act of
preserving.--_p.adj._ CONSER'VANT.--_n._ CONSERV[=A]'TION, the act of
conserving: the keeping entire.--_adj._ CONSERV[=A]'TIONAL.--_n._
CONSER'VATISM, the opinions and principles of a Conservative.--_adj._
CONSER'VATIVE, tending or having power to conserve.--_n._ (_politics_) one
who desires to preserve the institutions of his country against innovation
and change: one averse to change and progress.--_ns._ CONSER'VATIVENESS;
CONSERVATOIRE (kon-ser-va-twär'), CONSERVAT[=O]'RIUM, a name given by the
Italians to schools instituted for the purpose of advancing the study of
music and maintaining its purity; CON'SERV[=A]TOR, one who preserves from
injury or violation: a guardian, custodian:--_fem._ CONSER'VATRIX;
CONSER'VATORSHIP; CONSER'VATORY, a storehouse: a greenhouse or place in
which exotic plants are kept: a school of music.--_adj._
preservative.--_n._ CONSER'VER.--CONSERVATION OF ENERGY, the law that the
total amount of energy in a material system cannot be varied, provided the
system neither parts with energy to other bodies nor receives it from them;
CONSERVATION OF MATTER, the experimentally ascertained fact that no process
at the command of man can either destroy or create even a single particle
of matter.--CONSERVATORS OF THE PEACE, a title usually applied to knights
elected in each shire, from the 12th century onwards, for the conservation
of the peace. [L. _conserv[=a]re_--_con_, together, and _serv[=a]re_, to
keep.]

CONSIDER, kon-sid'[.e]r, _v.t._ to look at closely or carefully: to think
or deliberate on: to take into account: to attend to: to reward.--_v.i._ to
think seriously or carefully: to deliberate.--_adj._ CONSID'ERABLE, worthy
of being considered: important: more than a little.--_n._
CONSID'ERABLENESS.--_adv._ CONSID'ERABLY.--_n._ CONSID'ERANCE (_Shak._),
consideration.--_adjs._ CONSID'ER[=A]TE, CONSID'ERATIVE (_obs._),
thoughtful: serious: prudent: thoughtful for the feelings of
others.--_adv._ CONSID'ERATELY.--_ns._ CONSID'ERATENESS, thoughtfulness for
others; CONSIDER[=A]'TION, deliberation: importance: motive or reason:
compensation, reward: the reason or basis of a compact: (_law_) the thing
given or done or abstained from by agreement with another, and in view of
that other giving, doing, or abstaining from something.--_prep._
CONSID'ERING, in view of: seeing that.--_adv._ CONSID'ERINGLY, with
consideration. [Fr.--L. _consider[=a]re_, supposed to have been orig. a
term of augury--_con_, and _sidus_, _sideris_, a star.]

CONSIGN, kon-s[=i]n', _v.t._ to give to another: to sign or seal: to
transfer: to entrust: to commit: to transmit for sale or custody.--_adj._
CONSIGN'ABLE.--_ns._ CONSIGN[=A]'TION; CONSIG'NATORY, one who signs a
document jointly.--_adj._ CONSIGNED', given in trust.--_ns._ CONSIG'NATURE,
complete signature: joint signing; CONSIGNEE', one to whom anything is
consigned or entrusted; CONSIGN'ER, CONSIGN'OR; CONSIGN'MENT, the act of
consigning: the thing consigned: the writing by which anything is made
over: in Mercantile Law, goods placed in the hands of an agent or factor
for sale, or for some other specified purpose. [Fr.,--L. _consign[=a]re_,
to attest.]

CONSIGNIFY, kon-sig'ni-f[=i], _v.t._ to signify or indicate in connection
with something else.--_n._ CONSIGNIFIC[=A]'-TION.--_adj._
CONSIGNIF'ICATIVE.

CONSILIENCE, kon-sil'i-ens, _n._ concurrence: coincidence.--_adj._
CONSIL'IENT, agreeing. [L. _con_, together, and _sal[=i]re_, to leap.]

CONSIMILAR, kon-sim'i-lar, _adj._ like each other.--_ns._ CONSIMIL'ITUDE,
CONSIMIL'ITY. [L. _consimilis_.]

CONSIST, kon-sist', _v.i._ to exist, subsist: to co-exist: to agree.--_ns._
CONSIST'ENCE, CONSIST'ENCY, a degree of density: substance: agreement: the
quality of being self-consistent.--_adj._ CONSISTENT, fixed: not fluid:
agreeing together: uniform in thought or action.--_adv._
CONSIST'ENTLY.--_adjs._ CONSIST[=O]'RIAL, CONSIST[=O]'RIAN.--_n._
CONSIST'ORY, properly a place of assembly: the particular place where the
privy-council of the Roman emperor met, the council itself: an assembly or
council: a spiritual or ecclesiastical court in the R.C. Church, consisting
of the pope and cardinals, and determining all such matters as the
appointment of cardinals, bishops, &c.; in the Lutheran Church, exercising
a supervision over religion and education, over the clergy, schoolmasters,
and theological candidates; in the Reformed Church, the kirk-session, or
the presbytery.--CONSIST IN, to lie in: to depend upon: to be composed of;
CONSIST OF, to be made up of. [L. _consist[)e]re_--_con_, together,
_sist[)e]re_, to stand.]

CONSOCIATE, kon-s[=o]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to associate
together.--_p.adj._ CONS[=O]'CIATED.--_n._ CONSOCI[=A]'TION, companionship
(_with_): association: alliance. [L. _consoci[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_con_,
with, _soci[=a]re_, to associate--_socius_, a companion.]

CONSOLE, kon-s[=o]l', _v.t._ to give solace or comfort: to cheer in
distress.--_adj._ CONSOL'ABLE, that may be comforted.--_v.t._ CON'SOLATE
(_Shak._), to console.--_ns._ CONSOL[=A]'TION, solace: alleviation of
misery: a comforting circumstance; CONSOL[=A]'TION-MATCH, -RACE, &c., a
race, &c., in which only those who have been previously unsuccessful may
compete.--_adj._ CONSOL'ATORY.--_n._ CON'SOLER:--_fem._ CON'-SOL[=A]TRIX.
[L. _con_, inten., and _sol[=a]ri_, to comfort.]

CONSOLE, kon's[=o]l, _n._ (_archit._) a projection resembling a bracket,
frequently in the form of the letter S, used to support cornices, or for
placing busts, vases, or figures on: the key-desk of an organ.--_n._
CON'SOLE-TA'BLE, a table having one of its sides supported against a wall
by consoles or brackets. [Fr. _console_; prob. conn. with CONSOLIDATE.]

CONSOLIDATE, kon-sol'i-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to make solid: to form into a compact
mass: to unite into one.--_v.i._ to grow solid or firm: to unite.--_adj._
made firm or solid: united.--_p.adj._ CONSOL'IDATED.--_n._
CONSOLID[=A]'TION, act of making or becoming solid: confirmation.--_adj._
CONSOL'IDATIVE, tending to consolidate: having the quality of
healing.--_n._ CONSOL'IDATOR, one who or that which
consolidates.--CONSOLIDATION ACTS, acts of parliament which combine into
one general statute several special enactments. [L. _consolid[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_con_, inten., and _solidus_, solid.]

CONSOLS, kon'solz, _n.pl._ (short for CONSOLIDATED ANNUITIES) that part of
the British national debt which consists of several stocks consolidated
into one fund.

CONSOMMÉ, kon-so-m[=a]', _n._ a kind of soup made from meat by slow
boiling. [Fr.,--L. _consumm[=a]re_, to consummate.]

CONSONANT, kon'son-ant, _adj._ consistent: suitable: harmonious.--_n._ an
articulation which can be sounded only with a vowel: a letter of the
alphabet other than a vowel.--_ns._ CON'SONANCE, a state of agreement:
agreement or unison of sounds: (_mus._) a combination of notes which can
sound together without the harshness produced by beats: concord;
CON'SONANCY, harmony.--_adj._ CONSONANT'AL.--_adv._ CON'SONANTLY.--_adj._
CON'SONOUS, harmonious. [L. _consonans_, _-antis_, pr.p. of _conson[=a]re_,
to harmonise--_con_, with, and _son[=a]re_, to sound.]

CONSORT, kon'sort, _n._ a partner: a companion: a wife or husband: an
accompanying ship: (_obs._) a number of people: an orchestra: former
spelling for concert.--_v.t._ CONSORT' (_Shak._), to accompany: to
associate (_with_).--_v.i._ to associate or keep company: to
agree.--_p.adj._ CONSORT'ED, associated.--_n._ CON'SORTSHIP.--IN CONSORT,
in company: in harmony. [L. _consors_, from _con_, with, and _sors_,
_sortis_, a lot.]

CONSPECIES, kon-sp[=e]'sh[=e]z, _n._ (_zool._) a subspecies or
variety.--_adj._ CONSPECIF'IC.

CONSPECTUS, kon-spek'tus, _n._ a comprehensive survey: a synopsis.--_n._
CONSPECT[=U]'ITY (_Shak._), sight: the eye. [L.
_conspectus_--_conspic[)e]re_, to look at.]

CONSPICUOUS, kon-spik'[=u]-us, _adj._ clearly seen: visible to eye or mind:
prominent.--_ns._ CONSPIC[=U]'ITY, CONSPIC'UOUSNESS.--_adv._
CONSPIC'UOUSLY. [L. _conspicuus_--_conspic[)e]re_--_con_, inten.,
_spic[)e]re_, to look.]

CONSPIRE, kon-sp[=i]r', _v.i._ to plot or scheme together: to agree: to
concur to one end.--_v.t._ to plan, devise.--_n._ CONSPIR'ACY, the act of
conspiring: a banding together for an evil purpose: a plot:
concurrence.--_adj._ CONSPIR'ANT, conspiring.--_ns._ CONSPIR[=A]'TION,
conspiracy; CONSPIR'ATOR, one who conspires:--_fem._
CONSPIR'ATRESS.--_adj._ CONSPIRAT[=O]'RIAL.--_n._ CONSPIR'ER (_Shak._),
conspirator.--_adv._ CONSPIR'INGLY. [L. _conspir[=a]re_--_con_, together,
_spir[=a]re_, to breathe.]

CONSPISSATE, kon-spis'[=a]t, _v.t._ to inspissate.--_n._ CONSPISS[=A]'TION.

CONSPURCATION, kon-spur-k[=a]'shun, _n._ (_obs._) defilement. [L.
_conspurc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to defile.]

CONSTABLE, kun'sta-bl, _n._ formerly a state-officer of the highest rank:
the warden of a castle: a peace-officer: a policeman.--_ns._ CON'STABLERY,
the charge of a constable; CON'STABLESHIP; CON'STABLEWICK, the district of
a constable; CON'STABLING, acting as a constable or policeman;
CONSTAB'ULARY, the body of constables of a district, town, &c.--_adj._ of
or pertaining to constables, or peace-officers.--CONSTABLE OF FRANCE, chief
of the household under the old French kings, then commander-in-chief of the
army, judge in questions of chivalry, tournaments, and martial
displays.--HIGH CONSTABLE, one of two constables ordained in every hundred
or franchise, to make the view of armour, and to see to the conservation of
the peace; HIGH CONSTABLE OF SCOTLAND, the first subject in Scotland after
the blood-royal; LORD HIGH CONSTABLE OF ENGLAND, the seventh great officer
of the crown, and formerly a judge in the court of chivalry.--OUTRUN THE
CONSTABLE, to go too fast: to get into debt.--SPECIAL CONSTABLE, a person
sworn in by the justices to preserve the peace, or to execute warrants on
special occasions. [O. Fr. _conestable_ (Fr. _connétable_)--L. _comes
stabuli_, count of the _stabulum_, stable.]

CONSTANT, kon'stant, _adj._ fixed: unchangeable: firm: continual:
faithful.--_n._ (_math._) a term or quantity which does not vary throughout
a given investigation: that which remains unchanged.--_n._ CON'STANCY,
fixedness: unchangeableness: faithfulness: (_Shak._) perseverance:
(_Shak._) certainty.--_adv._ CON'STANTLY. [L. _constans_, _-antis_, from
_const[=a]re_, to stand firm--_con_, inten., _st[=a]re_, to stand.]

CONSTANTIA, kon-stan'shi-a, _n._ a wine produced around _Constantia_ in
Cape Colony.

CONSTANTINIAN, kon-stan-tin'yan, _adj._ pertaining to the Roman emperor,
_Constantine_ the Great (A.D. 274-337).

CONSTANTINOPOLITAN, kon-stan'ti-no-pol'it-an, _adj._ of or pertaining to
_Constantinople_.

CONSTAT, kon'stat, _n._ a certificate of what appears (_constat_) on record
touching a matter given by the auditors of the Exchequer: an attested copy
of the enrolment of letters patent.

CONSTELLATE, kon'stel-[=a]t, or kon-stel'[=a]t, _v.t._ to cluster.--_v.i._
to be fated, according to the position of the stars: to cluster
together.--_n._ CONSTELL[=A]'TION, a group of stars: an assemblage of
persons distinguished in some way: (_astrol._) a particular disposition of
the planets, supposed to influence the course of human life or
character.--_adj._ CONSTEL'LATORY. [L. _constellatus_, studded with
stars--_con_, with, _stell[=a]re_--_stella_, a star.]

CONSTERNATE, kon'ster-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to fill with dismay.--_n._
CONSTERN[=A]'TION, terror which throws into confusion: astonishment:
dismay. [L. _constern[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, from _con_, wholly,
_stern[)e]re_, to strew.]

CONSTIPATE, kon'stip-[=a]t, _v.t._ to stop up: to make costive: (_obs._) to
press together.--_n._ CONSTIP[=A]'TION, costiveness, an irregular and
insufficient action of the bowels. [L. _con_, together, _stip[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_, to pack.]

CONSTITUTE, kon'stit-[=u]t, _v.t._ to set up: to establish: to form or
compose: to appoint: to determine.--_n._ CONSTIT'UENCY, the whole body of
voters for a member of parliament.--_adj._ CONSTIT'UENT, constituting or
forming: essential: elemental: component.--_n._ an essential or elemental
part: one of those who elect a representative, esp. in parliament.--_n._
CONSTIT[=U]'TION, the act of constituting: the natural condition of body or
mind: disposition: a system of laws and customs established by the
sovereign power of a state for its own guidance: the established form of
government: a particular law or usage.--_adj._ CONSTIT[=U]'TIONAL, inherent
in the natural frame: natural: agreeable to the constitution or frame of
government: essential: legal: of a sovereign who rules subject to fixed
laws.--_n._ a walk for the sake of one's health.--_v.t._
CONSTIT[=U]'TIONALISE, to make constitutional.--_ns._
CONSTIT[=U]'TIONALISM, adherence to the principles of the constitution;
CONSTIT[=U]'TIONALIST, CONSTIT[=U]'TIONIST, one who favours the
constitution; CONSTITUTIONAL'ITY, the state or quality of being
constitutional.--_adv._ CONSTIT[=U]'TIONALLY.--_adj._ CON'STITUTIVE, that
constitutes or establishes: having power to enact, &c.: essential. [L.
_constitu[)e]re_, _constitutum_, from _con_, together, and _statu[)e]re_,
to make to stand, to place.]

CONSTRAIN, kon-str[=a]n', _v.t._ to urge with irresistible power: to force,
compel: to distress: to confine: to limit: to cause constraint.--_adj._
CONSTRAIN'ABLE.--_p.adj._ CONSTRAINED', forced, compelled:
embarrassed.--_adv._ CONSTRAIN'EDLY.--_n._ CONSTRAINT', irresistible force:
compulsion: confinement: repression of one's feelings: embarrassment. [O.
Fr. _constraindre_--L. _constring[)e]re_--_con_, together, _string[)e]re_,
to press. See STRAIN.]

CONSTRICT, kon-strikt', _v.t._ to press together: to contract: to
cramp.--_p.adj._ CONSTRICT'ED, narrowed: cramped: (_bot._) contracted or
tightened, so as to be smaller in some parts than in others.--_n._
CONSTRIC'TION, a pressing together: contraction: tightness.--_adj._
CONSTRICT'IVE.--_n._ CONSTRICT'OR, that which constricts or draws together:
a large serpent which crushes its prey in its folds--the Boa-constrictor
(q.v.). [L. _constring[)e]re_, _constrictum_.]

CONSTRINGE, kon-strinj', _v.t._ to draw together: to cause to
contract.--_v.i._ to contract.--_n._ CONSTRIN'GENCY.--_adj._ CONSTRIN'GENT,
having the quality of contracting. [L. _constring[)e]re_.]

CONSTRUCT, kon-strukt', _v.t._ to build up: to compile: to put together the
parts of a thing: to make: to compose.--_adj._ constructed.--_adjs._
CONSTRUCT'ABLE, CONSTRUCT'IBLE, able to be constructed.--_ns._
CONSTRUCT'ER, CONSTRUCT'OR; CONSTRUC'TION, the act of constructing:
anything piled together, building: manner of forming: (_gram._) the
arrangement of words in a sentence: interpretation: meaning.--_adjs._
CONSTRUC'TIONAL, pertaining to construction; CONSTRUCT'IVE, capable of
constructing: not direct or expressed, but inferred.--_adv._
CONSTRUCT'IVELY.--_ns._ CONSTRUCT'IVENESS, the faculty of constructing;
CONSTRUCT'URE.--CONSTRUCT STATE, in Hebrew and other Semitic languages, the
state of a noun depending on another noun, which in Aryan languages would
be in the genitive case--e.g. House of God--house being in the construct
state.--BEAR A CONSTRUCTION, to allow of a particular interpretation. [L.
_constru[)e]re_, _-structum_--_con_, _stru[)e]re_, to build.]

CONSTRUE, kon'str[=oo], or kon-str[=oo]', _v.t._ to exhibit the arrangement
in another language: to translate: to explain: to interpret: to
infer.--_v.i._ to admit of grammatical analysis.--CON'STER, an old form.
[L. _constru[)e]re_, _constructum_, to pile together.]

CONSTUPRATE, kon'st[=u]-pr[=a]t, _v.t._ (_obs._) to deflower.--_n._
CONSTUPR[=A]'TION.

CONSUBSIST, kon-sub-sist', _v.i._ to subsist together.

CONSUBSTANTIAL, kon-sub-stan'shal, _adj._ of the same substance, nature, or
essence, esp. of the Trinity.--_ns._ CONSUBSTAN'TIALISM, the doctrine of
consubstantiation; CONSUBSTAN'TIALIST, one who believes in
consubstantiation; CONSUBSTANTIAL'ITY.--_adv._ CONSUBSTAN'TIALLY, with
sameness of substance.--_v.t._ CONSUBSTAN'TI[=A]TE, to unite in one common
substance or nature.--_v.i._ to become so united.--_adj._ united in one
common substance.--_ns._ CONSUBSTANTI[=A]'TION (_theol._), the Lutheran
doctrine of the actual, substantial presence of the body and blood of
Christ co-existing in and with the bread and wine used at the Lord's
Supper; CONSUBSTANTI[=A]'TIONIST. [L. _con_, with, and SUBSTANTIAL.]

CONSUETUDE, kon'swe-t[=u]d, _n._ custom: familiarity.--_adj._
CONSUET[=U]'DINARY, customary.--_n._ an unwritten law established by usage,
derived by immemorial custom from antiquity: a ritual of customary
devotions. [L. _consuetudo_, custom.]

CONSUL, kon'sul, _n._ one of the two chief-magistrates in the Roman
republic: one commissioned to reside in a foreign country as an agent for,
or representative of, a government.--_n._ CON'SULAGE, duty paid to a consul
for protection of goods.--_adj._ CON'SULAR, pertaining to a consul.--_n._ a
man of consular rank.--_ns._ CON'SULATE, the office, residence, or
jurisdiction of a consul; CON'SULSHIP, the office, or term of office, of a
consul. [L.]

CONSULT, kon-sult', _v.t._ to ask advice of: to decide or act in favour of:
to look up to for information or advice: to discuss: to consider: to take
measures for the advantage of any one.--_v.i._ to consider in company: to
take counsel.--_n._ (kon-sult', or kon'sult) the act of consulting: a
meeting for consultation: a council: a meeting for conspiracy or
intrigue.--_ns._ CONSUL'TA, a meeting of council; CONSULT[=A]'TION,
deliberation, or a meeting for such, esp. of physicians or lawyers.--_adj._
CONSULT'ATIVE, of or pertaining to consultation, esp. of bodies taking part
in a consultation without voting on the decision.--_ns._ CONSULTEE', the
person consulted; CONSULT'ER, one who consults.--_adjs._ CONSULT'ING, of a
physician or lawyer who gives advice; CONSULT'IVE, pertaining to
consultation; CONSULT'ORY, CONSULT'ATORY. [L. _consult-[=a]re_, inten. of
_consul-[)e]re_, to consult.]

CONSUME, kon-s[=u]m', _v.t._ to destroy by wasting, fire, evaporation, &c.:
to use up: to devour: to waste or spend: to exhaust.--_v.i._ to waste
away.--_adj._ CONSUM'ABLE.--_adv._ CONSUM'EDLY, exceedingly--originally a
fantastic variant of _confoundedly_, and prob. influenced in meaning by
_consummately_.--_ns._ CONSUM'ER, as opposed to _producer_, he who uses an
article produced; CONSUM'ING, wasting or destroying. [L. _consum-[)e]re_,
to destroy--_con_, sig. completeness, _sum-[)e]re_, _sumptum_, to take.]

CONSUMMATE, kon'sum-[=a]t, or kon-sum'[=a]t, _v.t._ to raise to the highest
point: to perfect or finish: to make marriage legally complete by sexual
intercourse.--_adj._ complete, supreme, perfect of its kind.--_adv._
CONSUMM'ATELY, perfectly.--_n._ CONSUMM[=A]'TION, act of completing:
perfection: conclusion of life or of the universe: the subsequent
intercourse which makes a marriage legally valid.--_adj._
CONSUMM'ATIVE.--_n._ CON'SUMMATOR.--_adj._ CONSUMM'ATORY. [L. _consummare_,
to perfect--_con_, with, and _summus_, highest, perfect.]

CONSUMPTION, kon-sum'shun, _n._ the act of using up or consuming--the
converse of _production_--also CONSUMPT'; _pulmonary consumption_, a more
or less rapidly advancing process of lung destruction, with progressive
emaciation--phthisis, tuberculosis.--_adj._ CONSUMP'TIVE, wasting away:
inclined to the disease consumption.--_adv._ CONSUMP'TIVELY.--_ns._
CONSUMP'TIVENESS, a tendency to consumption; CONSUMPTIV'ITY. [See CONSUME.]

CONSUTE, kon's[=u]t, _adj._ (_entom._) marked as if with stitches, as the
wing-covers of some beetles.--_adj._ CONS[=U]'TILE (_obs._), stitched
together. [L. _consu[)e]re_, _-sutum_, to sew together.]

CONTABESCENT, kon-tab-es'ent, _adj._ wasting away, atrophied.--_n._
CONTABES'CENCE. [L. _contabescentem_--_contabesc[)e]re_, to waste away.]

CONTABULATE, kon-tab'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to floor with boards.--_n._
CONTABUL[=A]'TION. [L., _con_, with, _tabula_, a board.]

CONTACT, kon'takt, _n._ touching or close union: meeting: (_math._)
coincidence, as of two curves, in two or more successive points.--_adj._
CONTACT'UAL, pertaining to contact.--BE IN CONTACT (_with_), to be touching
anything; MAKE CONTACT, to complete an electrical current. [L.
_conting-[)e]re_, _contactum_, to touch--_con_, wholly, _tang[)e]re_, to
touch.]

CONTADINA, kon-ta-d[=e]'na, _n._ an Italian peasant woman:--_pl._
CONTADI'NE (-ne), CONTADI'NAS. [It.]

CONTAGION, kon-t[=a]'jun, _n._ transmission of a disease from the sick to
the healthy, either by direct contact of a part affected with the disease,
or through the medium of the excretions or exhalations of the body.--_n._
CONT[=A]'GIONIST, one who believes that certain diseases are
contagious.--_adj._ CONT[=A]'GIOUS, that may be communicated by
contact.--_adv._ CONT[=A]'GIOUSLY.--_ns._ CONT[=A]'GIOUSNESS;
CONT[=A]'GIUM, the supposed morbific matter by means of which disease
spreads.--CONTAGIOUS DISEASES ACTS, a series of laws passed in 1865 and
succeeding years for the better regulation of prostitutes in certain
seaport and military towns. [L. _contagion-em_--_con_, together,
_tang[)e]re_, to touch.]

CONTAIN, kon-t[=a]n', _v.t._ to comprise, to include: (_B._) to restrain,
esp. the sexual appetite.--_adj._ CONTAIN'ABLE, that may be
contained.--_ns._ CONTAIN'ANT, CONTAIN'ER. [Through Fr. from L.
_contin[=e]re_--_con_, together, _ten[=e]re_, to hold.]

CONTAMINATE, kon-tam'i-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to defile by touching or mixing with:
to pollute: to corrupt: to infect.--_adj._ CONTAM'INABLE.--_n._
CONTAMIN[=A]'TION, pollution.--_adj._ CONTAM'INATIVE. [L. _contamin[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_contamen_ (for _contagmen_), pollution. See CONTACT.]

CONTANGO, kon-tang'go, _n._ a percentage paid by the buyer to the seller of
stock for keeping back its delivery to the next settling-day,
continuation--opp. to _Backwardation_. [From CONTINUE.]

CONTECK, kon'tek, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as CONTEST. [O. Fr. _contek_, prob.
conn. with _contekier_, to touch.]

CONTEMN, kon-tem', _v.t._ to despise: to neglect, to disregard.--_n._
CONTEM'NER. [Fr.,--L. _contemn[)e]re_, _-temptum_, to value little--_con_,
inten., _temn[)e]re_, to slight.]

CONTEMPER, kon-temp'[.e]r, _v.t._ to blend together, to qualify by mixture:
to adapt to anything.--_ns._ CONTEMPER[=A]'TION (_obs._), CONTEM'PERATURE.
[L. _contemper[=a]re_.]

CONTEMPLATE, kon'tem-pl[=a]t, or kon-tem'pl[=a]t, _v.t._ to consider or
look at attentively: to meditate on or study: to intend.--_v.i._ to think
seriously: to meditate (with _on_, _upon_).--_adj._ CONTEMP'LABLE.--_ns._
CONTEM'PLANT, CONTEMP'LATIST; CONTEMPL[=A]'TION, continued study of a
particular subject: a meditation written, or a subject for such.--_adj._
and _n._ CONTEM'PLATIVE, given to contemplation.--_adv._
CONTEM'PLATIVELY.--_ns._ CONTEM'PLATIVENESS; CON'TEMPL[=A]TOR, one who
contemplates: a student. [L. _contempl[=a]ri_, _-[=a]tus_, to mark out
carefully a _templum_ or place for auguries--_con_, sig. completeness, and
_templum_. See CONSIDER and TEMPLE.]

CONTEMPORANEOUS, kon-tem-po-r[=a]'ne-us, _adj._ living, happening, or being
at the same time.--_n._ CONTEMPORAN[=E]'ITY (_geol._), does not imply that
two systems were precisely synchronous, but merely that each occupies the
same relative position in the succession of systems.--_adv._
CONTEMPOR[=A]'NEOUSLY.--_ns._ CONTEMPOR[=A]'NEOUSNESS;
CONTEM'PORARINESS.--_adj._ CONTEM'PORARY, contemporaneous, occupying the
same period (_with_).--_n._ one who lives at the same time: a rival
newspaper or magazine.--_v.t._ CONTEM'PORISE, to make contemporary in mind.
[L. _con_, together, and _temporaneus_--_tempus_, time.]

CONTEMPT, kon-tempt', _n._ scorn: disgrace: (_law_) disregard of the rules
or an offence against the dignity of a court (with _of_, _for_).--_ns._
CONTEMPTIBIL'ITY, CONTEMPT'IBLENESS.--_adj._ CONTEMPT'IBLE,
despicable.--_adv._ CONTEMPT'IBLY.--_adj._ CONTEMPT'UOUS, haughty,
scornful.--_adv._ CONTEMPT'UOUSLY.--_n._ CONTEMPT'UOUSNESS. [See CONTEMN.]

CONTEND, kon-tend', _v.i._ to strive: to struggle in emulation or in
opposition: to dispute or debate (with _against_, _for_, _with_, _about_):
to urge one's course.--_ns._ CONTEND'ENT, CONTEND'ER, one who
contends.--_p.adj._ CONTEND'ING, striving.--_n._ CONTEN'TION, a violent
straining after any object: strife: debate.--_adj._ CONTEN'TIOUS,
quarrelsome.--_adv._ CONTEN'TIOUSLY.--_n._ CONTEN'TIOUSNESS. [L.
_contend[)e]re_, _-tentum_--_con_, with, _tend[)e]re_, to stretch.]

CONTENEMENT, kon-ten'[=e]-ment, _n._ land connected with a tenement.

CONTENT, kon-tent', or kon'tent, _n._ that which is contained: the capacity
or extent of anything: the substance: (_pl._) the things contained: the
list of subjects treated of in a book. [See CONTAIN.]

CONTENT, kon-tent', _adj._ having the desires limited by present enjoyment:
satisfied.--_n._ satisfaction--often 'heart's content.'--_interj._ = I am
content, agreed!--the formula of assent in the House of Lords.--_v.t._ to
make content: to satisfy the mind: to make quiet: to please.--_n._
CONTENT[=A]'TION (_obs._).--_adj._ CONTENT'ED, content.--_adv._
CONTENT'EDLY.--_ns._ CONTENT'EDNESS, CONTENT'MENT.--_adj._ CONTENT'LESS,
without content: discontented. [Fr.,--L. _contentus_, contained, hence
satisfied--_con_, and _ten[=e]re_, to hold.]

CONTERMINOUS, kon-t[.e]r'min-us, _adj._ having a common boundary:
coincident with: co-extensive with in time, substance, &c.--Also
CONTER'MINABLE, CONTER'MINAL, CONTER'MINANT, CONTER'MINATE. [L.
_conterminus_, neighbouring--_con_, together, and _terminus_, a boundary.]

CONTEST, kon-test', _v.t._ to call in question or make the subject of
dispute: to strive for.--_n._ CON'TEST, a struggle for superiority: strife:
debate.--_adj._ CONTEST'ABLE.--_ns._ CONTEST'ANT, one who contests;
CONTEST[=A]'TION, the act of contesting: contest: strife:
emulation.--_p.adj._ CONTEST'ED.--_adv._ CONTEST'INGLY, by
contest.--CONTESTED ELECTION, an election for a member of parliament or the
like, where more than one competitor offer themselves. [Fr.,--L.
_contest[=a]ri_, to call to witness--_con_, and _test[=a]ri_, to be a
witness--_testis_, a witness.]

CONTEXT, kon'tekst, _n._ the parts of a discourse or treatise which precede
and follow a special passage and fix its true meaning.--_adj._
CONTEXT'UAL--_adv._ CONTEXT'UALLY.--_n._ CONTEXT'URE, the interweaving of
parts into a whole: the structure or system of anything: any interwoven
fabric: the composition of a writing.--_v.t._ (_Carlyle_) to weave. [L.
_contextus_, _contex[)e]re_--_con_, together, _tex[)e]re_, _textum_, to
weave.]

CONTICENT, kon'tis-ent, _adj._ (_Thackeray_) silent. [L. _conticent-em_,
_con_, and _tac[=e]re_, to be silent.]

CONTIGNATION, kon-tig-n[=a]'shun, _n._ joining together: any structure so
joined: a framework or stage. [L.
_contignation-em_--_contign[=a]re_--_con_, _tignum_, wood.]

CONTIGUOUS, kon-tig'[=u]-us, _adj._ touching, adjoining: near.--_ns._
CONTIG[=U]'ITY, CONTIG'UOUSNESS.--_adv._ CONTIG'UOUSLY. [L.
_contiguus_--_conting[)e]re_, to touch on all sides--_con_, wholly,
_tang[)e]re_, to touch.]

CONTINENT, kon'ti-nent, _n._ a large extent of land not broken up by seas:
the mainland of Europe: one of the great divisions of the land surface of
the globe.--_adj._ restraining the indulgence of pleasure, esp. sexual:
temperate: virtuous.--_ns._ CON'TINENCE, CON'TINENCY, the restraint imposed
by a person upon his desires and passions: self-restraint in sexual
indulgence, often absolute: chastity.--_adj._ CONTINENT'AL, characteristic
of a continent, as of climate, &c.: pertaining to the European continent,
or to the colonies of North America at the period of independence.--_n._
CONTINENT'ALISM, anything peculiar to the usage of the Continent.--_adv._
CON'TINENTLY.--CONTINENTAL SYSTEM, the name given to Napoleon's plan for
shutting out England from all commercial connection with Europe. [L.
_continentem_--_contin[=e]re_, to contain--_con_, together, _ten[)e]re_, to
hold.]

CONTINGENT, kon-tin'jent, _adj._ dependent on something else: liable but
not certain to happen: accidental.--_n._ an event which is liable but not
certain to occur: a share or proportion, esp. of soldiers.--_ns._
CONTIN'GENCE, CONTIN'GENCY.--_adv._ CONTIN'GENTLY. [L.
_contingent-em_--_con_, _tang[)e]re_, to touch.]

CONTINUE, kon-tin'[=u], _v.t._ to draw out or prolong: to extend or
increase in any way: to unite without break: to persist in.--_v.i._ to
remain in the same place or state: to last or endure: to
persevere.--_adjs._ CONTIN'UABLE, that may be continued; CONTIN'UAL,
without interruption: unceasing.--_adv._ CONTIN'UALLY.--_n._ CONTIN'UANCE,
duration: uninterrupted succession: stay.--_adjs._ CONTIN'UANT;
CONTIN'U[=A]TE, close united: (_Shak._) unbroken.--_ns._ CONTINU[=A]'TION,
constant succession: extension; CONTINU[=A]'TION-DAY, the same as
CONTANGO-DAY, that on which contangoes are fixed.--_adj._ CONTIN'U[=A]TIVE,
continuing.--_n._ CONTIN'U[=A]TOR, one who continues or keeps up a series
or succession.--_adj._ CONTIN'UED, uninterrupted: unceasing:
extended.--_adv._ CONTIN'UEDLY.--_ns._ CONTIN'UEDNESS; CONTIN'UER, one who
continues, or has the power of persevering; CONTIN[=U]'ITY, state of being
continuous: uninterrupted connection.--_adj._ CONTIN'UOUS, joined together
without interruption.--_adv._ CONTIN'UOUSLY.--_ns._ CONTIN'UOUSNESS;
CONTIN'[=U]UM, a continuous thing:--_pl._ CONTIN'UA. [Fr.,--L.
_continu[=a]re_--_continuus_, joined, connected, from _contin[=e]re_.]

CONTLINE, kont'l[=i]n, _n._ in the stowage of casks the space between them:
the spiral intervals formed between the strands of a rope, by their being
twisted together. [Prob. _cant_.]

CONTO, kont'o, _n._ a Portuguese money of account, a million reis = £220.

CONTORNIATE, kon-tor'ni-[=a]t, _n._ a coin or medal with a deep groove
round the disc.--_adj._ having this.

CONTORNO, kon-tor'no, _n._ contour or outline. [It.]

CONTORT, kon-tort', _v.t._ to twist or turn violently: to writhe.--_adj._
CONTORT'ED, twisted: folded or twisted back upon itself, as some parts of
plants.--_ns._ CONTOR'TION, a violent twisting; CONTOR'TIONIST, a gymnast
who practises contorted postures: one who twists words and phrases.--_adj._
CONTORT'IVE, expressing contortion. [L. _con_, inten., and _torqu[=e]re_,
_tortum_, to twist.]

CONTOUR, kon't[=oo]r, or kon-t[=oo]r', _n._ the outline: the line which
bounds the figure of any object.--_v.t._ to mark with contour
lines.--CONTOUR LINES, lines drawn in a map through points all at the same
height above sea-level--usually on the British Ordnance Survey maps at
intervals of 50 feet. [Fr. _con_, and _tour_, a turning--L. _tornus_--Gr.
_tornos_, a lathe.]

CONTRA, kon'tra, _adv._ and _prep._ against, opposite: in front of: to the
contrary: a doublet of COUNTER- (_mus._), signifying an octave lower than
the typical form, as in _contrabass_, &c. See Appendix.

CONTRABAND, kon'tra-band, _adj._ contrary to law: prohibited.--_n._ illegal
traffic: prohibition: prohibited goods.--_ns._ CON'TRABANDISM, trafficking
in contraband goods; CON'TRABANDIST, a smuggler.--CONTRABAND OF WAR, a name
applied to certain commodities, as military stores, and even coal in an age
of war steamers, not to be supplied by neutral to belligerent powers. [Sp.
_contrabanda_--It. _contrabbando_--L. _contra_, against, L. L. _bandum_,
ban.]

CONTRABASS, kon'tra-b[=a]s, _n._ the double-bass viol, giving the lower
octave to the bass in the orchestra.--_adj._ applied to other instruments
taking a similar part.--Also CONTRABAS'SO and COUNT'ERBASE.

CONTRACT, kon-trakt', _v.t._ to draw together: to lessen: to shorten: to
acquire: to incur: to bargain for: to betroth.--_v.i._ to shrink: to become
less.--_n._ CON'TRACT, an agreement on fixed terms: a bond: a betrothment:
the writing containing an agreement.--_adj._ CONTRACT'ED, drawn together:
narrow: mean.--_adv._ CONTRACT'EDLY.--_ns._ CONTRACT'EDNESS;
CONTRACTIBIL'ITY, CONTRACT'IBLENESS.--_adjs._ CONTRACT'IBLE, capable of
being contracted; CONTRACT'ILE, tending or having power to contract.--_ns._
CONTRACTIL'ITY; CONTRAC'TION, act of contracting: a word shortened by
rejecting a part of it: a symbol for shortening in palæography, &c.--_adj._
CONTRACT'IVE, tending to contract.--_n._ CONTRACT'OR, one of the parties to
a bargain or agreement: one who engages to execute work or furnish supplies
at a fixed rate.--_adj._ CONTRACT'UAL.--CONTRACT ONE'S SELF OUT OF, to get
rid of some general obligation by making a special contract; CONTRACT WORK,
work done for a fixed sum estimated beforehand and paid down for the whole
job. [L. _contractus_--_con_, together, _trah[)e]re_, to draw.]

CONTRA-DANCE. See COUNTRY-DANCE.

CONTRADICT, kon-tra-dikt', _v.t._ to oppose by words: to assert the
contrary: to deny: to be contrary to in character.--_adj._
CONTRADICT'ABLE.--_n._ CONTRADIC'TION, act of contradicting: a speaking
against: denial: inconsistency.--_adj._ CONTRADIC'TIOUS.--_advs._
CONTRADIC'TIOUSLY (_rare_), CONTRADIC'TORILY.--_adjs._ CONTRADICT'IVE,
CONTRADICT'ORY, affirming the contrary: inconsistent.--_n._
CONTRADICT'ORINESS, the quality of being contradictory, [L.
_contradic[)e]re_, _-dictum_.]

CONTRADISTINCTION, kon-tra-dis-tingk'shun, _n._ distinction by
contrast.--_adj._ CONTRADISTINCT'IVE, distinguishing by opposite
qualities.--_v.t._ CONTRADISTIN'GUISH, to mark the difference between two
things by contrasting their different qualities.

CONTRAFISSURE, kon'tra-fish-[=u]r, _n._ (_surg._) a fracture or contusion
of the skull at a place opposite that on which the blow was received.

CONTRAHENT, kon'tra-hent, _adj._ entering into a contract.--_n._ a
contracting party. [L. _contrahent-em_--_contrah[)e]re_.]

CONTRA-INDICATE, kon'tra-in'di-k[=a]t, _v.t._ of a disease, to show
symptoms adverse to a particular treatment.--_ns._ CON'TRA-IN'DICANT,
CON'TRA-INDIC[=A]'TION.

CONTRAIRE, kon-tr[=a]r, _adj._ an obsolete form of CONTRARY.

CONTRALATERAL, kon-tra-lat'e-ral, _adj._ occurring on the opposite side.

CONTRALTO, kon-tral't[=o], _n._ the deepest or lowest species of musical
voice in boys, in eunuchs, and best of all in women. [See ALTO and COUNTER
(1).]

CONTRAPLEX, kon'tra-pleks, _adj._ (_teleg._) having two currents or
messages passing in opposite directions at the same time.

CONTRAPOSITION, kon'tra-po-zish'un, _n._ opposition, contrast: (_logic_) an
immediate inference, which consists in denying the original subject of the
contradictory of the original predicate.--_adj._ CON'TRA-POS'ITIVE.

CONTRAPTION, kon-trap'shun, _n._ (_U.S._) a contrivance.

CONTRAPUNTAL. See COUNTERPOINT.

CONTRA-ROTATION, kon'tra-r[=o]-t[=a]'shun, _n._ rotation in a contrary
direction.

CONTRARY, kon'tra-ri, _adj._ opposite: contradictory--CONTRA'RIANT
(_rare_).--_n._ a thing that is contrary or of opposite qualities.--_n.pl._
CON'TRARIES, things opposite in quality: (_logic_) propositions which
destroy each other.--_n._ CONTRAR[=I]'ETY, opposition:
inconsistency.--_adv._ CON'TRARILY.--_n._ CON'TRARINESS.--_adj._
CONTR[=A]'RIOUS, showing contrariety: repugnant: opposite.--_advs._
CONTR[=A]'RIOUSLY, contrarily; CON'TRARIWISE, on the contrary way or side:
on the other hand. [L. _contrarius_--_contra_, against.]

CONTRAST, kon-trast', _v.i._ to stand in opposition to.--_v.t._ to set in
opposition, in order to show superiority or give effect.--_n._ CON'TRAST,
opposition or unlikeness in things compared: exhibition of
differences.--_adj._ CONTRAST'IVE. [Fr. _contraster_--L. _contra_, opposite
to, _st[=a]re_, to stand.]

CONTRATE, kon'tr[=a]t, _adj._ having cogs or teeth arranged in a manner
contrary to the usual one, or projecting parallel to the axis.

CONTRA-TENOR. Same as COUNTER-TENOR (q.v. under COUNTER, 1).

CONTRAVALLATION, kon-tra-val-[=a]'shun, _n._ a fortification built by
besiegers about the place invested. [L. _contra_, opposite, _vall[=a]re_,
_[=a]tum_, to fortify.]

CONTRAVENE, kon-tra-v[=e]n', _v.t._ to oppose.--_n._ CONTRAVEN'TION, act of
contravening: opposition: obstruction. [L. _contra_, against, _ven[=i]re_,
to come.]

CONTRAYERVA, kon-tra-y[.e]r'va, _n._ a stimulating and tonic aromatic root
of tropical America. [Sp. _contrayerba_--L. _contra_, against, _herba_, a
herb.]

CONTRETEMPS, kon-tr-tang', _n._ something happening inopportunely or at the
wrong time, anything embarrassing, a hitch. [Fr. _contre_--L. _contra_,
against, and Fr. _temps_--L. _tempus_, time.]

CONTRIBUTE, kon-trib'[=u]t, _v.t._ to give along with others: to give for a
common purpose: to furnish an article to a newspaper, &c.: to pay a
share.--_v.i._ to give or bear a part.--_adj._ CONTRIB'UTARY, paying a
share, contributable, subject to contribution.--_n._ CONTRIB[=U]'TION, a
collection: a levy or charge imposed upon a people: anything furnished to a
common stock: a written composition supplied to a jointly written book,
newspaper, &c.--_adjs._ CONTRIB'UTIVE, CONTRIB'UTORY, giving a share:
helping.--_n._ CONTRIB'UTOR. [L. _con_, with, _tribu[)e]re_, _-utum_, to
give.]

CONTRIST, kon-trist', _v.t._ (_obs._) to sadden.--_n._ CONTRIST[=A]'TION.
[Fr.,--L. _contrist[=a]re_--_con_, inten., and _tristis_, sad.]

CONTRITE, kon'tr[=i]t, _adj._ broken-hearted for sin: penitent.--_adv._
CON'TRITELY.--_ns._ CON'TRITENESS; CONTRI'TION, deep sorrow for sin:
remorse. [L. _contritus_--_conter-[)e]re_--_con_, wholly, _ter-[)e]re_, to
bruise.]

CONTRITURATE, kon-trit'[=u]-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to pulverise together.

CONTRIVE, kon-tr[=i]v', _v.t._ to plan: to invent: to bring about or
effect: to plot.--_adj._ CONTRIV'ABLE, that may be contrived.--_ns._
CONTRIV'ANCE, CONTRIVE'MENT, act of contriving: the thing contrived:
invention: design: artifice; CONTRIV'ER, a schemer, a manager. [O. Fr.
_controver_--_con-_, _trover_, to find--L. _turb[=a]re_, to disturb.]

CONTRIVE, kon-triv', _v.t._ (_obs._) to spend, as time. [L.
_conter-[)e]re_, _contritum_, perf. _contr[=i]vi_, to wear out.]

CONTROL, kon-tr[=o]l', _n._ restraint: authority: command.--_v.t._ to
check: to restrain: to govern:--_pr.p._ contr[=o]l'ling; _pa.p._
contr[=o]lled'.--Formerly COMPTROLL', COUNTROL', CONTROUL'.--_adj._
CONTROL'LABLE, capable of, or subject to, control.--_ns._ CONTROL'LER,
COMPTROL'LER, one who checks the accounts of others by a counter-roll;
CONTROL'LERSHIP; CONTROL'MENT, act or power of controlling: state of being
controlled: control. [Fr. _contrôle_, from _contre-rôle_, a duplicate
register--L. _contra_, against, _rotulus_, a roll.]

CONTROVERT, kon'tro-v[.e]rt, _v.t._ to oppose: to argue against: to
refute.--_adj._ CONTROVER'SIAL, relating to controversy.--_n._
CONTROVER'SIALIST, one given to controversy.--_adv._
CONTROVER'SIALLY.--_ns._ CON'TROVERSY, a debate: contest:
resistance.--_adj._ CONTROVERT'IBLE.--_adv._ CONTROVERT'IBLY.--_n._
CON'TROVERTIST. [L. _contra_, against, and _vert-[)e]re_, to turn.]

CONTUMACIOUS, kon-t[=u]-m[=a]'shus, _adj._ opposing lawful authority with
contempt: obstinate: stubborn.--_adv._ CONTUM[=A]'CIOUSLY.--_ns._
CONTUM[=A]'CIOUSNESS; CON-TUMAC'ITY; CON'TUMACY, obstinate disobedience or
resistance. [L. _contumax_, _-acis_, insolent, from _con_, and
_tum-[=e]re_, to swell, or _temn-[)e]re_, to despise.]

CONTUMELY, kon't[=u]-mel-i, _n._ rudeness: insolence: reproach.--_adj._
CONTUM[=E]'LIOUS, haughtily reproachful: insolent.--_adv._
CONTUM[=E]'LIOUSLY.--_n._ CONTUM[=E]'LIOUSNESS. [L. _contumelia_, which is
prob. from the same source as _contumacy_.]

CONTUND, kon-tund', _v.t._ to bruise or pound.--_v.t._ CONT[=U]SE', to beat
or bruise: to crush.--_n._ CONT[=U]'SION, act of bruising; state of being
bruised; a bruise.--_adj._ CONT[=U]'SIVE, apt to bruise. [L.
_contund[)e]re_, _contusum_--_con_, and _tund[)e]re_, to bruise.]

CONUNDRUM, kon-un'drum, _n._ a sort of riddle containing some odd or
fanciful resemblance between things quite unlike: any puzzling question.
[Ety. dub.]

CONVALESCE, kon-val-es', _v.i._ to regain health.--_ns._ CONVALES'CENCE,
CONVALES'CENCY, gradual recovery of health and strength.--_adj._
CONVALES'CENT, gradually recovering health.--_n._ one recovering health.
[L. _con_, and _valesc-[)e]re_--_val-[=e]re_, to be strong.]

CONVALLARIA, kon-va-l[=a]'ri-a, _n._ a genus of _Liliaceæ_, its only
species the Lily-of-the-valley. [L. _convallis_, a sheltered valley.]

CONVECTION, kon-vek'shun, _n._ the process of transmission of heat or
electricity through liquids or gases by means of currents.--_adj._
CONVEC'TIVE, occasioned by convection. [L.,--_con_, and _veh[)e]re_, to
carry.]

CONVENANCE, kong've-nangs, _n._ what is suitable or proper: (_pl._) the
conventional usages or social proprieties. [Fr.]

CONVENE, kon-v[=e]n', _v.i._ to come together: to assemble.--_v.t._ to call
together.--_adj._ CONV[=E]'NABLE.--_n._ CONVEN'ER, one who convenes a
meeting: the chairman of a committee. [Fr.,--L. _conven-[=i]re_, from
_con_, together, and _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

CONVENIENT, kon-v[=e]n'yent, _adj._ suitable: handy: commodious.--_adj._
CONVEN'ABLE (_obs._), fitting.--_ns._ CONVEN'IENCE, CONVEN'IENCY,
suitableness: an advantage: any particular domestic accommodation, as a
closet, &c.--_adv._ CONVEN'IENTLY. [L. _conven[=i]re_.]

CONVENT, kon'vent, _n._ an association of persons secluded from the world
and devoted to a religious life: the house in which they live, a monastery
or nunnery.--_adj._ CONVENT'UAL, belonging to a convent.--_n._ a monk or
nun; a member of one of the two divisions of the Franciscans, following a
mitigated rule--the other being the _Observants_. [Through Fr. from L.
_convent-um_, _conven[=i]re_, to come together.]

CONVENTICLE, kon-vent'i-kl, _n._ applied in contempt to a meeting for
worship of dissenters from the Established Church, applied esp. to the
field-preachings of the Presbyterian ministers in the persecutions under
Charles II. and James II.: any private, clandestine, or irregular
meeting.--_v.i._ to hold such.--_n._ CONVEN'TICLER. [L. _conventiculum_, a
secret meeting of monks, dim. of _conventus_.]

CONVENTION, kon-ven'shun, _n._ an assembly, esp. of representatives or
delegates for some common object: any extraordinary assembly called upon
any special occasion: any temporary treaty: an agreement: established
usage: fashion.--_adj._ CONVEN'TIONAL, formed by convention: growing out of
tacit agreement or custom: customary: not spontaneous.--_v.t._
CONVEN'TIONALISE.--_ns._ CONVENTIONALISM, that which is established by
tacit agreement, as a mode of speech, &c.; CONVEN'TIONALIST, one who
adheres to a convention, or is swayed by conventionalism; CONVENTIONAL'ITY,
state of being conventional: that which is established by use or
custom.--_adv._ CONVEN'TIONALLY.--_adj._ CONVEN'TIONARY, acting under
contract.--_ns._ CONVEN'TIONER, CONVEN'TIONIST. [Fr.,--L. _convention-em_.
See CONVENE.]

CONVERGE, kon-v[.e]rj', _v.i._ to tend to one point.--_ns._ CONVER'GENCE,
CONVER'GENCY, act or quality of tending to one point.--_adjs._ CONVER'GENT,
CONVER'GING, tending to one point. [L. _con_, together, and _verg[)e]re_,
to bend, to incline.]

CONVERSAZIONE, kon-v[.e]r-sat-se-[=o]'ne, _n._ a meeting for conversation,
particularly on literary subjects:--_pl._ CONVERSAZI[=O]'NI (-n[=e]). [It.]

CONVERSE, kon-v[.e]rs', _v.i._ to have intercourse: to talk
familiarly.--_n._ CON'VERSE, familiar intercourse: conversation.--_adj._
CONVERS'ABLE, disposed to converse: sociable.--_adv._ CONVERS'ABLY.--_ns._
CON'VERSANCE, CON'VERSANCY, state of being conversant: familiarity.--_adj._
CON'VERSANT, acquainted by study: familiar; (_B._) walking or associating
with.--_n._ CONVERS[=A]'TION, intercourse: talk: familiar discourse; (_B._)
behaviour or deportment.--_adj._ CONVERS[=A]'TIONAL.--_ns._
CONVERS[=A]'TIONALIST, CONVERS[=A]'TIONIST, one who excels in conversation;
CONVERS[=A]'TIONISM, a colloquialism.--_adj._ CONVER'SATIVE, ready to talk.
[Fr.,--L. _convers[=a]ri_, to live with--_con_, inten., and _vers[=a]re_,
to turn much--_vert[)e]re_, to turn.]

CONVERT, kon-vert', _v.t._ to change or turn from one thing, condition, or
religion to another: to change from an irreligious to a holy life: to alter
one thing into another: to apply to a particular purpose.--_n._ CON'VERT,
one converted: one who has become religious, or who has changed his
religion.--_adj._ CON'VERSE, reversed in order or relation.--_n._ that
which is the opposite of another: a proposition converted or turned
about--i.e. one in which the subject and predicate have changed
places.--_adv._ CON'VERSELY.--_ns._ CONVER'SION, change from one thing,
state, or religion to another: (_theol._) the conscious change of heart
impelling the repentant sinner to a new life: appropriation to a special
purpose: (_logic_) act of interchanging the terms of a proposition;
CON'VERTEND, the proposition to be converted; CONVERT'ER, one who converts:
a vessel in which materials are changed from one condition to another;
CONVERTIBIL'ITY, CONVERT'IBLENESS.--_adjs._ CONVERT'IBLE, CONVER'SIVE
(_obs._), that may be converted: equivalent.--_adv._ CONVERT'IBLY.--_n._
CON'VERTITE, a convert, a reformed woman. [L. _convert[)e]re_,
_conversum_--_con_, and _vert[)e]re_, to turn.]

CONVEX, kon'veks, _adj._ rising into a round form on the outside, the
reverse of _concave_.--_n._ the vault of heaven, &c.--_adj._ CONVEXED',
made convex.--_adv._ CONVEX'EDLY.--_ns._ CONVEX'ITY, CON'VEXNESS, roundness
of form on the outside.--_adv._ CON'VEXLY.--_adjs._ CONVEX'O-CON'CAVE,
convex on one side, and concave on the other; CONVEX'O-CON'VEX, convex on
both sides. [L. _convexus_--_conveh-[)e]re_--_con_, together, and
_veh[)e]re_, to carry.]

CONVEY, kon-v[=a]', _v.t._ to carry: to transmit: to impart: to steal: to
communicate, as ideas: to make over in law.--_adj._ CONVEY'ABLE.--_ns._
CONVEY'AL; CONVEY'ANCE, the means of conveying: a vehicle of any kind:
(_law_) the act of transferring property: the writing which transfers it;
CONVEY'ANCER, one whose business is the preparation of deeds for the
transference of property; CONVEY'ANCING, the business of a conveyancer;
CONVEY'ER. [O. Fr. _conveier_--L. _con_, along with, and O. Fr. _veie_--L.
_via_, a way.]

CONVICINITY, kon-vi-sin'i-ti, _n._ neighbourhood.

CONVICT, kon-vikt', _v.t._ to prove guilty: to pronounce guilty.--_n._
CON'VICT, one convicted or found guilty of crime, esp. one who has been
condemned to penal servitude.--_ns._ CONVIC'TION, act of convincing: strong
belief: a proving guilty: (_theol._) the condition of being consciously
convicted of sin; CON'VICTISM, the convict system.--_adj._ CONVICT'IVE,
able to convince or convict.--CARRY CONVICTION, to bear irresistibly the
stamp or proof of truth; UNDER CONVICTION, in such a state of awakened
consciousness. [From root of CONVINCE.]

CONVINCE, kon-vins', _v.t._ to subdue the mind by evidence: to satisfy as
to truth or error: (_B._) to convict: to refute.--_n._
CONVINCE'MENT.--_adjs._ CONVINC'IBLE; CONVINC'ING, producing
conviction.--_adv._ CONVINC'INGLY. [L. _convinc[)e]re_, _con_, sig.
completeness, and _vinc[)e]re_, _victum_, to conquer.]

CONVIVIAL, kon-viv'i-al, _adj._ feasting in company: relating to a feast:
social: jovial.--_v.i._ CONVIVE' (_Shak._), to feast together.--_n._ a
companion at table.--_ns._ CONVIV'IALIST, a convivial fellow;
CONVIVIAL'ITY.--_adv._ CONVIV'IALLY. [L.,--_convivium_, a living together,
a feast--_con_, together, and _viv[)e]re_, to live.]

CONVOKE, kon-v[=o]k', _v.t._ to call together: to assemble--also
CON'VOC[=A]TE.--_n._ CONVOC[=A]'TION, act of convoking: a provincial synod
of clergy, the ancient ecclesiastical council of the archbishop, esp. those
of the provinces of Canterbury and York in the Church of England: the great
legislative assembly of the university at Oxford and elsewhere.--_adj._
CONVOC[=A]'TIONAL.--_n._ CONVOC[=A]'TIONIST. [L. _convoc[=a]re_--_con_,
together, and _voc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to call.]

CONVOLVE, kon-volv', _v.t._ to roll together, or one part on
another.--_adjs._ CON'VOLUTE, -D, rolled together, or one part on
another.--_n._ CONVOL[=U]'TION, a twisting: a fold. [L. _con_, together,
_volv[)e]re_, _-utum_, to roll.]

CONVOLVULUS, kon-vol'v[=u]-lus, _n._ a genus of twining or trailing plants,
called also _Bindweed_. [L.,--_convolv[)e]re_.]

CONVOY, kon-voy', _v.t._ to accompany for protection.--_n._ CON'VOY, the
act of convoying: protection: that which convoys or is convoyed, esp. a
ship or ships of war guarding a fleet of merchant-vessels, also the ships
so protected: an honourable escort: a supply of stores, &c., under escort.
[Fr. _convoyer_. See CONVEY.]

CONVULSE, kon-vuls', _v.t._ to agitate violently: to affect by
spasms.--_adj._ CONVUL'SIBLE, subject to convulsion.--_n._ CONVUL'SION, any
involuntary contraction of the voluntary muscles of the body, esp. such
seizures in which the body is thrown into violent spasmodic contractions,
the sensibility and voluntary motion being for a time suspended: any
violent disturbance.--_adjs._ CONVUL'SIONAL, CONVUL'SIONARY, pertaining to
convulsions.--_n.pl._ CONVUL'SIONARIES, a fanatical sect of Jansenists who
sprang up in France about 1730.--_adj._ CONVULS'IVE, attended with
convulsions: spasmodic.--_adv._ CONVULS'IVELY.--_n._ CONVULS'IVENESS. [L.
_con_, inten., and _vell[)e]re_, _vulsum_, to pluck, to pull.]

CONY, CONEY, k[=o]'ni, or kun'i, _n._ a rabbit: (_B._) translation of Heb.
_shâphân_, the _Hyrax syriacus_, or rock-badger: (_obs._) an equivocal term
of endearment for a woman.--_n._ C[=O]'NY-BURR'OW, a rabbit-warren.--_v.t._
C[=O]'NY-CATCH (_Shak._), to cheat.--_ns._ C[=O]NY-CATCH'ER, a cheat;
C[=O]'NY-WOOL, rabbits' fur. [Prob. through O. Fr. _connil_, from L.
_cuniculus_, a rabbit.]

CONYZA, k[=o]-n[=i]'za, _n._ a genus of strong-smelling herbaceous
composite plants--applied formerly to the fleabanes. [Gr.]

COO, k[=oo], _v.i._ to make a sound as a dove: to caress fondly, usually in
phrase, 'to bill and coo:'--_pr.p._ c[=oo]'ing; _pa.p._ c[=oo]ed.--_n._ the
sound emitted by doves.--_adv._ COO'INGLY. [From the sound.]

COOEE, k[=oo]'[=e], COOEY, koo'i, _n._ the signal-call of the native
Australians in the bush.--_v.i._ to make such.

COOF, küf, _n._ (_Scot._) a stupid fellow. [Prob. M. E. _cofe_, the modern
_Cove_, a fellow.]

COOK, kook, _v.t._ to prepare food: to manipulate for any purpose, or
falsify, as accounts, &c.: to concoct.--_n._ one whose business is to
cook.--_ns._ COOK'ERY, the art or practice of cooking; COOK'ERY-BOOK, a
book of receipts for cooking dishes.--_n.pl._ COOK'ING-APP'LES, &c.,
apples, &c., sold specially for cooking.--_ns._ COOK'ING-RANGE, a stove
adapted for cooking several things at once; COOK'-ROOM, a room in which
food is cooked; COOK'-SHOP, an eating-house.--TO COOK ONE'S GOOSE
(_slang_), to finish off, to kill. [A.S. _cóc_, a cook (Ger. _koch_),
borrowed from L. _coquus_.]

COOK, kook, _v.i._ to make the sound of the cuckoo.

COOK, kook, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to appear and disappear by turns.

COOKIE, kook'i, _n._ a kind of sweet cake used at tea.--_n._ COOKIE-SHINE,
a tea-party. [Dut. _koekje_, a cake.]

COOL, k[=oo]l, _adj._ slightly cold: free from excitement: calm: not
zealous, ardent, or cordial: indifferent: impudent: colloquially of a large
sum of money, as 'a cool thousand.'--_v.t._ to make cool: to allay or
moderate, as heat, excitement, passion, &c.--_v.i._ to grow cool.--_n._
that which is cool: coolness.--_n._ COOL'ER, anything that cools: a vessel
in which something is cooled--e.g. 'a butter-cooler.'--_adjs._
COOL'-HEAD'ED, not easily excited: capable of acting with composure;
COOL'ISH, somewhat cool; COOL'LY (_Spens._), cool.--_adv._ in a cool
manner: indifferently: impudently.--_ns._ COOL'NESS, moderate cold:
indifference: want of zeal; COOL'-TANK'ARD, a cooling drink of wine and
water, with lemon-juice, spices, and borage: a local name of borage; COOLTH
(_dial._), coolness. [A.S. _cól_; Ger. _kühl_. See COLD and CHILL.]

COOLIE, COOLY, k[=oo]l'i, _n._ an Indian or Chinese labourer who has
emigrated under contract to a foreign land: a European's name for a hired
native labourer in India and China. [Prob. _Kuli_, a tribe of Guzerat; or
orig. Tamil, cf. _k[=u]li_, hire.]

COOM, k[=oo]m, _n._ matter that gathers at the naves of wheels: soot that
gathers at the mouth of an oven: coal-dust. [Prob. conn. with Ger. _kahm_,
mould gathered on liquids.]

COOM, k[=oo]m, _n._ (_Scot._) the wooden centering on which a bridge is
built: anything arched or vaulted.--_adj._ COOM'-CEILED, said of a garret
with the inside ceiling sloping from the wall. [Origin obscure.]

COOMB, COMB, k[=oo]m, _n._ a deep little wooded valley: a hollow on the
flank of a hill. [A.S. _cumb_, a hollow.]

COOMB, COMB, k[=oo]m, _n._ a measure of capacity = 4 bushels. [A.S. _cumb_,
a measure.]

COON, k[=oo]n, _n._ the raccoon: a sly fellow.--A GONE COON, one whose case
is hopeless. [U.S.]

COONTIE, COONTY, k[=oo]n'ti, _n._ the arrowroot plant of Florida.

COOP, k[=oo]p, _n._ a tub, cask, or barrel: a box or cage for fowls or
small animals.--_v.t._ to confine in a coop: to shut up or confine.--_n._
COOP'ER, one who makes tubs, casks, &c.: a mixture of stout and
porter.--_v.t._ to repair (tubs, &c.): to prepare, patch up.--_ns._
COOP'ERAGE, the work or workshop of a cooper: the sum paid for a cooper's
work; COOP'ERING; COOP'ERY, the business of a cooper. [A.S. _cýpe_, a
basket; cf. Ger. _kufe_.]

COOPER, k[=oo]p'[.e]r, _n._ a floating grog-shop.--_v.i._ to supply
fishing-boats at sea with liquor. [See COPER.]

CO-OPERATE, k[=o]-op'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.i._ to work together.--_n._
CO-OPER[=A]'TION, joint operation; the association of a number of persons
for the cheaper purchasing of goods, or for carrying on some branch of
industry.--_adjs._ CO-OP'ER[=A]TIVE, CO-OP'ERANT, working together.--_n._
CO-OP'ER[=A]TOR.--CO-OPERATING GRACE (_theol._), the R.C., Arminian, and
Socinian doctrine that the human will co-operates with the divine in the
matter of saving grace. [CO-, together, and OPERATE.]

CO-OPT, k[=o]-opt', _v.t._ to elect into any body by the votes of its
members.--_ns._ CO-OPT[=A]'TION, CO-OP'TION.--_adj._ CO-OP'TATIVE. [L.
_coopt[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_co-_, together, _opt[=a]re_, to choose.]

CO-ORDINATE, k[=o]-or'di-n[=a]t, _adj._ holding the same order or
rank.--_v.t._ to make co-ordinate.--_n._ a co-ordinate element: each of a
system of two or more magnitudes used to define the position of a point,
line, or plane, by reference to a fixed system of lines, points, &c.--_n._
CO-OR'DINANCE, a joint ordinance.--_adv._ CO-OR'DINATELY.--_ns._
CO-OR'DINATENESS, the state of being co-ordinate: equality of rank, &c.;
CO-ORDIN[=A]'TION, state of being co-ordinate.--_adj._ CO-OR'DINATIVE,
indicating co-ordination.

COOST, küst, a Scotch form of CAST.

COOT, k[=oo]t, _n._ a short-tailed water-fowl, with a characteristic white
spot--an extension of the bill--on the forehead; hence called _bald_, as in
phrase, 'bald as a coot.' [M. E. _cote_; cf. Dut. _koet_.]

COOT, küt, _n._ (_Scot._) the ankle.--_adj._ COOT'IE, having legs clad with
feathers. [Scot.; cf. Dut. _koot_; Flem. _keute_.]

COP, kop, _n._ a conical ball of thread on a spindle--also COP'PIN:
(_obs._) a top or head of anything.--_adj._ COPPED, rising to a cop or
head. [A.S. _cop_, _copp_.]

COP, kop, _v.t._ (_slang_) to capture.--_ns._ COP, COP'PER (_slang_), a
policeman.

COPAIBA, ko-p[=a]'ba, _n._ a balsam obtained from an American tree, much
used in medicine.--Also COPAI'VA. [Sp.,--Braz.]

COPAL, k[=o]'pal, _n._ a resinous substance used in varnishes. [Sp.,--Mex.
_copalli_, resins generally.]

COPARTNER, k[=o]-pärt'ner, _n._ a joint partner.--_ns._ COPART'NERSHIP,
COPART'NERY, COPAR'CENER, COPAR'CENARY. [L. _co-_, together, and PARTNER.]

COPATAIN, kop'a-t[=a]n, _adj._ (_Shak._) of a hat, high-crowned like a
sugar-loaf.

COPATRIOT. A form of COMPATRIOT.

COPE, k[=o]p, _n._ a covering: a cap or hood: anything spread overhead: a
coping: an ecclesiastical vestment worn over the alb or surplice in
processions, at solemn lauds and vespers, but not by the celebrant at mass,
semicircular, without sleeves and with a hood, fastened across the breast
with a clasp or morse, the straight edge usually ornamented with a broad
orphrey.--_v.t._ to cover with a cope.--_ns._ COPE'-STONE, COP'ING-STONE,
the stone which copes or tops a wall; COP'ING, the covering course of
masonry of a wall. [From root of CAP.]

COPE, k[=o]p, _v.t._ to barter or exchange. [Cf. Dut. _koopen_.]

COPE, k[=o]p, _v.i._ to contend.--_v.t._ to vie with, esp. on equal terms
or successfully: to match.--_n._ COPES'MATE (_Shak._), a companion. [Fr.
_couper_--L. _colaphus_, a blow with the fist.]

COPECK, KOPECK, k[=o]'pek, _n._ a Russian copper coin, worth from ¼ to 1/3
of a penny English. [Russ.]

COPER, k[=o]p'[.e]r, _n._ a ship employed in surreptitiously supplying
strong drink to deep-sea fishermen--often spelt COOPER.--_v.i._ to supply
liquor in such a way. [Dut. _kooper_--_koopen_, to trade; cf. Ger.
_kaufen_, to buy; A.S. _ceápan_.]

COPERNICAN, ko-p[.e]r'ni-kan, _adj._ relating to _Copernicus_, the famous
Prussian astronomer (1473-1543), or to his system.

COPHOSIS, k[=o]-f[=o]'sis, _n._ total deafness. [Gr.,--_k[=o]phos_, deaf.]

COPHOUSE, kop'hows, _n._ a tool-house.

COPIER. See COPY.

COPIOUS, k[=o]'pi-us, _adj._ plentiful: overflowing: not concise.--_adv._
C[=O]'PIOUSLY.--_n._ C[=O]'PIOUSNESS. [L. _copiosus_--_copia_,
plenty--_co-_, inten., and _ops_, _opis_, wealth.]

COPLAND, kop'land, _n._ a piece of ground terminating in a cop or acute
angle.

COPOPSIA, k[=o]-pop'si-a, _n._ fatigue of sight. [Gr. _k[=o]phos_, dull,
_opsis_, sight.]

CO-PORTION, k[=o]-por'shun, _n._ (_Spens._) equal portion or share.

COPOS, kop'os, _n._ a morbid lassitude. [Gr.]

COPPER, kop'[.e]r, _n._ a moderately hard metal of a fine red colour,
perhaps the first metal employed by man: money made of copper--e.g. 'a
copper' = a penny or halfpenny: a vessel made of copper.--_adj._ made of
copper: copper-coloured.--_v.t._ to cover with copper.--_adj._
COPP'ER-BOTT'OMED, having the bottom covered with copper, as a ship--_n._
COPP'ER-CAP'TAIN, one who styles himself captain without grounds.--_adjs._
COPP'ER-FACED, faced with copper, as type; COPP'ER-FAS'TENED, fastened with
copper bolts.--_ns._ COPP'ER-HEAD, a United States snake: (_U.S._) a
northern sympathiser with the South in the Civil War; COPP'ERING, the act
of sheathing with copper: a covering of copper.--_adjs._ COPP'ERISH,
COPP'ERY, C[=U]'PREOUS, containing or like copper.--_ns._ COPP'ER-NICK'EL,
arsenical nickel, niccolite; COPP'ER-NOSE, a red nose caused by
intemperance; COPP'ERPLATE, a plate of polished copper on which something
has been engraved: an impression taken from the plate; COPP'ER-PYR[=I]'TES,
a double sulphide of copper and iron of yellow hue; COPP'ER-SMITH, a smith
who works in copper; COPP'ER-WORK, a place where copper is wrought or
manufactured; COPP'ERWORM, the ship-worm.--HOT COPPERS, parched tongue and
throat after a bout of drinking. [Low L. _cuper_--L. _cuprum_, a contr. of
_cyprium aes_, 'Cyprian brass,' because found in _Cyprus_.]

COPPERAS, kop'[.e]r-as, _n._ sulphate of iron, used in dyeing black, or
making ink. [Fr. _couperose_ (It. _copparosa_)--L. _cupri rosa_, rose of
copper--so Diez.]

COPPICE, kop'is, COPSE, kops, _n._ a wood of small growth for periodical
cutting.--_n._ COPSE'WOOD.--_adj._ COP'SY. [O. Fr. _copeiz_, wood newly
cut--Low L. _colp[=a]re_, to cut--L. _colaphus_, a blow with the fist.]

COPPIN. See COP (1).

COPPLE, kop'l, _n._ (_obs._) a crest on a bird's head.--_n._
COPP'LE-CROWN.--_adj._ COPP'LE-CROWNED.

COPPLE-STONE, an obsolete form of COBBLE-STONE.

COPRA, kop'ra, _n._ the dried kernel of the coco-nut, yielding coco-nut
oil. [Port., from Malay.]

CO-PRESENCE, ko-prez'ens, _n._ presence together.--_adj._ CO-PRES'ENT.

COPROLITE, kop'ro-l[=i]t, _n._ fossilised excrement of animals in
Palæozoic, Mesozoic, and Tertiary strata.--_adj._ COPROLIT'IC. [Gr.
_kopros_, dung, _lithos_, a stone.]

COPROLOGY, kop-rol'oj-i, _n._ the unclean in literature and art. [Gr.
_kopros_, dung, _logia_, discourse.]

COPROPHAGAN, kop-rof'a-gan, _n._ a dung-beetle.--_n._ COPROPH'AGIST, a
dung-eater.--_adj._ COPROPH'AGOUS, dung-eating. [Gr. _kopros_, dung,
_phagein_, to eat.]

COPSEWOOD. See COPPICE.

COPT, kopt, _n._ a Christian descendant of the ancient Egyptians.--_adj._
COP'TIC.--_n._ the language of the Copts. [A corr. of Gr. _Aigyptios_,
Egyptian.]

COPULA, kop'[=u]-la, _n._ that which joins together: a bond or tie:
(_logic_) the word joining the subject and predicate.--_adj._
COP'ULAR.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ COP'UL[=A]TE, to unite in sexual
commerce.--_n._ COPUL[=A]'TION, act of copulating.--_adj._ COP'UL[=A]TIVE,
uniting.--_n._ (_gram._) a conjunction that unites ideas as well as
words.--_adj._ COP'UL[=A]TORY. [L.,--_co-_, together, _ap-[)e]re_, to
join.]

COPY, kop'i, _n._ an imitation from an original pattern, a transcript: that
which is imitated: a specimen of penmanship to be imitated: the original
work from which an imitation or reproduction is made: manuscript for
printing.--_v.t._ to write, paint, &c. after an original: to imitate: to
transcribe:--_pa.p._ cop'ied.--_ns._ COP'IER, COP'YER, one who copies: an
imitator; COP'Y-BOOK, a book in which copies are written or printed for
imitation; COP'YHOLD (_Eng. law_), a species of estate or right of holding
land, for which the owner can only show the copy of the rolls originally
made by the steward of the lord's court; COP'YHOLDER, one who has a tenure
of land by copyhold; COP'YING-PRESS, a machine for copying manuscript
letters by pressure; COP'YISM, the practice of the copyist; COP'YIST, one
whose business is to copy documents; COPY'RIGHT, the exclusive right of an
author or his heirs to multiply copies of a written or printed composition,
or of a work of art (for books in England the term is forty-two years, or
the life of the author and seven years, whichever is longer).--_adj._
protected by copyright.--_v.t._ to secure the copyright of.--A COPY OF
VERSES, a set of verses, esp. a college exercise. [Fr. _copie_, from L.
_copia_, plenty; in Low L. a transcript.]

COQUELICOT, k[=o]k'li-ko, _n._ (_Jane Austen_) a brilliant red, the colour
of the red poppy. [Fr.]

COQUET, COQUETTE, ko-ket', _v.i._ to excite admiration or love.--_v.t._ to
trifle with in love: to flirt with: to dally with:--_pr.p._ coquet'ting;
_pa.p._ coquet'ted.--_ns._ C[=O]'QUETRY, act of coquetting: attempt to
attract admiration, without serious affection: deceit in love: any kind of
prettiness; COQUETTE', a vain woman who seeks admiration from mere vanity:
a flirt.--_adj._ COQUET'TISH, practising coquetry: befitting a
coquette.--_adv._ COQUET'TISHLY.--_n._ COQUET'TISHNESS. [Fr.
_coqueter_--_coquet_, dim. of _coq_, a cock.]

COQUILLA, kok-il'ya, _n._ the nut of a Brazil palm, whose mottled,
dark-brown endosperm is used by button-makers and turners. [Sp.; dim. of
_coca_, shell.]

COQUIMBITE, k[=o]-kim'b[=i]t, _n._ a yellowish hydrous sulphate of
iron--also _white copperas_.

COQUIMBO, k[=o]-kim'b[=o], _n._ the burrowing owl of South America.

COQUITO, k[=o]-k[=e]'t[=o], _n._ a beautiful Chilian palm. [Sp., dim. of
_coco_, coco-nut.]

COR, kor, _n._ a Hebrew measure, the same as the homer, containing 10
ephahs or baths (10 bushels and 3 gallons).

CORACLE, kor'a-kl, _n._ a small oval rowboat used in Wales, made of skins
or oilcloth stretched on wickerwork. [W. _corwgl_--_corwg_, anything round;
Gael. _curach_, a wicker-boat.]

CORACOID, kor'a-koid, _adj._ shaped like a crow's beak.--_n._ (_anat._) an
important paired bone in the breast-girdle, forming along with the scapula
the articulation for the fore-limb, and always lying ventrally. [Gr.
_korax_, _korakos_, a crow, and _eidos_, form.]

CO-RADICATE, k[=o]-rad'i-k[=a]t, _adj._ (_philol._) of the same root.

CORAGE. See COURAGE.

CORAGGIO, kor-adj'o, _interj._ courage! [It.]

CORAL, kor'al, _n._ a hard substance of various colours growing on the
bottom of the sea, composed of the skeletons of zoophytes: a child's toy
made of coral.--_adj._ made of or like coral.--_n._
COR'AL-IS'LAND.--_adjs._ CORALL[=A]'CEOUS, like, or having the qualities
of, coral; CORALLIF'EROUS, containing coral; CORAL'LIFORM, having the form
of coral; CORALLIG'ENOUS, producing coral; COR'ALLINE, of, like, or
containing coral.--_n._ a limy seaweed of a delicate pinkish or purplish
colour, common on British coasts: a coral-like substance.--_n._ COR'ALLITE,
a petrified substance, in the form of coral.--_adjs._ COR'ALLOID, -AL, in
the form of coral: resembling coral.--_ns._ COR'AL-RAG, a limestone rock
formed chiefly of petrified coral found in the oolite system; COR'AL-REEF,
a reef or bank formed by the growth and deposit of coral; COR'AL-SEA, the
part of the Pacific between Australia on the west and the New Hebrides on
the east; COR'AL-SNAKE, a small venomous snake, in the same family as the
cobra; COR'AL-TREE, a small tropical tree or shrub, producing long spikes
of beautiful red flowers resembling coral; COR'AL-WOOD, a hard South
American cabinet-wood, first yellow, then red; COR'AL-WORT, a cruciferous
plant in English woods--called also _Tooth-wort_ or _Tooth-violet_. [O.
Fr.,--L. _coralium_--Gr. _korallion_.]

CORANACH. See CORONACH.

CORANTO, ko-rant'o, _n._ a rapid and lively kind of dance. [Fr.
_courante_--L. _curr[)e]re_, to run.]

CORB, korb, _n._ an iron basket used in raising coal. [L. _corbis_, a
basket.]

CORBAN, kor'ban, _n._ anything devoted to God in fulfilment of a vow. [Heb.
_qorb[=a]n_, an offering, sacrifice.]

CORBE, korb, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as CORBEL.

CORBEAU, kor-b[=o]', _n._ a dark-green colour, almost black. [Fr., 'a
raven.']

CORBEIL, kor'bel, _n._ (_fort._) a basket filled with earth, and set up as
a protection from the fire of the enemy. [Fr. _corbeille_--L. _corbicula_,
dim. of _corbis_, a basket.]

CORBEL, kor'bel, _n._ (_archit._) a projection of stone or wood from the
face of a wall, supporting pillars or other superincumbent weights.--_adj._
COR'BELLED.--_ns._ COR'BELLING; COR'BEL-T[=A]'BLE, a row of corbels and the
parapet or cornice they support. [O. Fr. _corbel_--Low L. _corvellus_, dim.
of _corvus_, a raven.]

CORBICULUM, kor-bik'[=u]-lum, _n._ the flattened hairy outer surface of the
hind-tibia of a bee, used for carrying pollen:--_pl._ CORBIC'ULA.--_adj._
CORBIC'ULATE. [L., dim. of _corbis_, a basket.]

CORBIE, kor'bi, _n._ a raven, crow.--CORBIE MESSENGER (_Scot._), one who
returns too late, or not at all; CORBIE-STEPS, the stepped slopes of
gables--also _Crow-steps_. [O. Fr. _corbin_--L. _corvus_, a crow.]

CORCASS, kor'kas, _n._ a salt-marsh in Ireland. [Ir.]

CORCHORUS, kor'ko-rus, _n._ a genus of tropical plants cultivated for their
fibre, which is the jute of commerce. [Gr.]

CORCLE, kork'l, _n._ the embryo in the seed of a plant.--Also COR'CULE. [L.
_corculum_, dim. of _cor_, heart.]

CORD, kord, _n._ a small rope or thick kind of string: something resembling
a cord, as 'spinal cord,' 'umbilical cord,' &c.: (_fig._) anything that
binds or restrains: a measure of firewood, originally determined by the use
of a cord or string.--_v.t._ to supply with a cord: to bind with a
cord.--_n._ CORD'AGE, a quantity of cords or ropes, as the rigging of a
ship, &c.--_adj._ CORD'ED, fastened with cords: furrowed, as with cords:
(_her._) wound about with cords: piled in 'cords.'--_ns._ CORD'-GRASS, a
genus of grasses of which one species found in muddy salt-marshes is used
for making ropes; CORD'ING, the act of binding: cordage; CORD'ITE, an
approved smokeless gunpowder, so called from its cord-like appearance;
CORD'-WOOD, wood put up in 'cords.' [Fr. _corde_--L. _chorda_. See CHORD.]

CORDELIER, kor-de-l[=e]r', _n._ a Franciscan friar, so named from the
knotted cord worn by him as a girdle: (_pl._) name of a club in the French
Revolution, from its meeting-place being an old convent of the Cordeliers.
[O. Fr. _cordel_, dim. of _corde_, a rope.]

CORDIAL, kor'di-al, _adj._ hearty: with warmth of heart: sincere:
affectionate: reviving the heart or spirits.--_n._ anything which revives
or comforts the heart: a medicine or drink for refreshing the
spirits.--_adjs._ COR'DATE (_bot._), heart-shaped;
COR'DIAL-HEART'ED.--_v.i._ COR'DIALISE, to become cordial, to
fraternise.--_ns._ CORDIAL'ITY, COR'DIALNESS.--_adv._ COR'DIALLY.--_adj._
COR'DIFORM, in the form of a heart. [Fr.,--L. _cor_, _cordis_, the heart.]

CORDILLERA, kor-dil-y[=a]'ra, _n._ a name applied in America to a chain of
mountains, as the Andes and Rocky Mountains. [Sp.,--Old Sp. _cordilla_--L.
_chorda_, cord.]

CORDINER, kor'di-n[.e]r, _n._ Same as CORDWAINER.

CORDON, kor'don, _n._ a cord or ribbon bestowed as a badge of honour:
(_fort._) a row of stones along the line of a rampart: in military
operations, a line of sentries within sight of each other, guarding a place
to prevent the passage of unauthorised persons.--CORDON BLEU, originally
the blue ribbon which in France supported the insignia of the order of the
Holy Ghost--transferred to other first-class distinctions, and playfully to
a first-class cook; CORDON SANITAIRE, a line of sentries to guard a place
infected with contagious disease. [Fr.]

CORDOVAN, kor'do-van, CORDWAIN, kord'w[=a]n, _n._ goatskin leather,
originally from _Cordova_ in Spain.--_ns._ CORD'WAINER, a worker in
cordovan or cordwain: a shoemaker; CORD'WAINERY.

CORDUROY, kor'du-roi, _n._ a ribbed kind of fustian, a cotton stuff made
after the fashion of velvet: (_pl._) trousers made of corduroy.--_adj._
made of corduroy. [Perh. Fr. _corde du roi_, king's cord.]

CORE, k[=o]r, _n._ the heart: the inner part of anything, esp. of
fruit.--_v.t._ to take out the core of fruit.--_adjs._ CORED, having the
core removed; CORE'LESS, without core: pithless: hollow.--_n._ COR'ER, an
instrument for removing the core. [Ety. dub.; perh. conn. with L. _cor_,
the heart.]

CORE, k[=o]r, _n._ a number of people. [See CORPS.]

CO-REGENT, k[=o]-r[=e]'jent, _n._ a joint-regent.

COREGONUS, ko-reg'o-nus, _n._ a genus of fishes in the salmon family, found
esp. near the coast.--_adj._ COREG'ONINE.

CO-RELATION, CO-RELATIVE. See CORRELATE.

CO-RELIGIONIST, k[=o]-re-lij'un-ist, _n._ one of the same religion as
another.

CO-RESPONDENT, k[=o]-re-spond'ent, _n._ (_law_) a man charged with
adultery, and proceeded against along with the wife, who is the
_respondent_.

CORF, korf, _n._ a variant of CORB (q.v.).

CORIACEOUS, k[=o]r-i-[=a]'shus, _adj._ leathery: of or like leather. [L.
_corium_--Gr. _chorion_, skin, leather.]

CORIANDER, k[=o]r-i-an'd[.e]r, _n._ an annual plant, the seeds of which
when fresh have an offensive smell, used as a medicine, spice, &c.--_n._
CORIAN'DER-SEED. [Fr.,--L. _coriandrum_--Gr. _koriannon_.]

CORINTHIAN, kor-inth'i-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Corinth_, a city of
Greece: pertaining to an ornate order of Greek architecture, (_M. Arnold_)
to an over-brilliant literary style: profligate.--_n._ a profligate: a man
of fashion, a 'swell.'--_n._ COR'INTH (_obs._), a brothel, from the
notorious licentiousness of Corinth.--_v.i._ CORINTH'IANISE, to be
licentious.--CORINTHIAN BRASS, BRONZE, an alloy made in Corinth, much
valued in ancient times: assurance or effrontery.

CORIUM, k[=o]'ri-um, _n._ the innermost layer of the skin. [L., a hide.]

CO-RIVAL, CO-RIVALRY, CO-RIVALSHIP. See CORRIVAL.

CORK, kork, _n._ the outer bark of the cork-tree, an oak found in the south
of Europe, &c.: a stopper made of cork: any stopper.--_adj._ made of
cork.--_v.t._ to stop with a cork: to stop up.--_ns._ CORK'AGE, corking or
uncorking of bottles: a charge made by hotel-keepers for uncorking of
bottles when the liquor has not been supplied from the house;
CORK'-CUT'TER, one employed in cutting corks for bottles, &c.: an
instrument used for this.--_adj._ CORKED, stopped by a cork: tainted by the
cork, as wine: blackened by burnt cork.--_ns._ CORK'ER, a finisher:
(_slang_) something conclusive; CORK'ING-PIN, a large pin, probably from
fastening the hair to a pad of cork; CORK'-JACK'ET, a jacket made of or
lined with cork, to aid in swimming; CORK'-LEG, an artificial leg, partly
of cork; CORK'-SCREW, a screw for drawing corks from bottles.--_adj._ like
a cork-screw in shape.--_v.i._ to move in a spiral manner.--_v.t._ to pull
out with difficulty, as a cork: to obtain information from by force or
cunning.--_n._ CORK'-TREE, a species of oak from which cork is
obtained.--_adj._ CORK'Y, of or resembling cork: (_Shak._) withered. [Sp.
_corcho_--L. _cortex_, bark, rind.]

CORM, korm, CORMUS, kor'mus, _n._ sometimes called a _solid bulb_--the
short, bulb-like subterranean stem of many plants--e.g. crocus. [Gr.
_kormos_, the lopped trunk of a tree.]

CORMOPHYTE, kor'm[=o]-f[=i]t, _n._ a plant having a true axis of
growth--also COR'MOGEN.--_adj._ CORMOPHYT'IC.

CORMORANT, kor'mo-rant, _n._ a genus of web-footed sea-birds, of great
voracity: a glutton. [Fr. _cormoran_, from L. _corvus marinus_, the
sea-crow.]

CORN, korn, _n._ a grain or kernel: seeds that grow in ears, as wheat, rye,
&c.: grain of all kinds.--_v.t._ to form into grains; to sprinkle with salt
in grains: to salt.--_ns._ CORN'-BALL (_U.S._), a ball of popped corn,
sweetened, with white of egg; CORN'-BRAND'Y, spirits made from grain;
CORN'-BEE'TLE, a small beetle, the larva of which is very destructive to
grain; CORN'BRASH, a member of the Lower Oolites (see OOLITE); CORN'-CAKE
(_U.S._), a cake made of Indian-corn meal; CORN'-CHAND'LER, a dealer in
corn; CORN'-COB, the elongated, woody receptacle constituting the ear of
maize; CORN'-COCK'LE, a tall beautiful weed, with large purple flowers,
common in corn-fields; CORN'-CRAKE, one of the true rails, with
characteristic cry, frequenting corn-fields.--_adj._ CORNED, granulated;
salted.--_ns._ CORN'-EXCHANGE', a mart where grain is sampled and sold;
CORN'-FAC'TOR, a wholesale dealer in corn; CORN'-FIELD, a field in which
corn is growing; CORN'-FLAG, the popular name of plants of genus
_Gladiolus_; CORN'-FLOUR, the name applied to the finely-ground flour of
maize or Indian corn; CORN'-FLOW'ER, a well-known composite weed of
corn-fields, having a beautiful deep azure flower; CORN'-FLY, CORN'-MOTH,
insects very destructive to corn; CORN'ING-HOUSE, a place where corn is
granulated; CORN'-LAND, ground suitable for growing corn; CORN'-LAW, a law
made for the restriction and regulation of the trade in corn: esp. in _pl._
(in England), laws that restricted the importation of corn by imposing a
duty, repealed in 1846; CORN'-LOFT, a granary; CORN'-MAR'IGOLD, a
chrysanthemum common in corn-fields; CORN'-M[=E]'TER, an official measurer
of corn; CORN'-MILL, a mill for grinding corn; CORN'-PARS'LEY, a European
grain-field flower (_Petroselinum segetum_); CORN'-PIPE, a pipe made by
slitting the joint of a green stalk of corn; CORN'-POPP'Y, the common red
poppy, a troublesome weed growing in corn-fields; CORN'-RENT, a fluctuating
rent paid in corn, not money; CORN'-RIG (_Scot._), a ridge in a corn-field;
CORN'-SAL'AD, a genus of humble annual weeds, found in corn-fields, of
which some are used as spring salads; CORN'STONE, a kind of mottled
limestone, often concretionary, usually occurring in those systems which
are largely composed of reddish sandstones; CORN'-VAN, a machine for
winnowing corn; CORN'-WEEV'IL, a small insect very destructive to stored
grain.--_adj._ CORN'Y, like corn, produced from corn: (_slang_)
tipsy.--CORN-COB PIPE, a tobacco-pipe with the bowl made of the cob of
Indian corn.--CORN IN EGYPT, an expression signifying abundance, in
reference to Gen. xlii. 2. [A.S. _corn_; Goth. _kaurn_; akin to L.
_granum_.]

CORN, korn, _n._ a small hard growth chiefly on the toe or foot, resulting
from an increase of thickness of the cuticle, caused by excessive pressure
or friction on the part.--_adj._ COR'NEOUS, horny.--_n._ CORN'-PLAS'TER, a
remedial plaster applied to a corn.--_adj._ CORN'Y, of or pertaining to
corns: horny.--TREAD ON ONE'S CORNS, to injure one's feelings. [O. Fr.,--L.
_cornu_, a horn.]

CORNAGE, korn'[=a]j, _n._ an ancient tenure of land in the north country,
the tenant being bound to blow a horn in case of a Scottish foray.

CORNEA, kor'ne-a, _n._ the transparent horny membrane which forms the front
covering of the eye.--_adj._ COR'NEAL.

CORNEL, kor'nel, _n._ the cornelian cherry or dogwood, a small tree native
to southern Europe.--Also COR'NEL-TREE, CORN[=E]'LIAN-TREE. [O. Fr.
_cornille_--Low L. _corniola_, _cornolium_--L. _cornus_, cornel.]

CORNELIAN, kor-n[=e]'li-an, _n._ a precious stone, a variety of
chalcedony.--Also CARN[=E]'LIAN (q.v.). [Fr. _cornaline_--L. _cornu_, a
horn.]

CORNER, kor'n[.e]r, _n._ the point where two lines meet: a secret or
confined place: an embarrassing position, difficulty: (_obs._) a point in a
rubber at whist: a free kick given to the opposite side when a player in
football kicks the ball over his own goal-line: an operation by which the
whole of a stock or commodity is bought up, so that speculative sellers are
compelled to buy, to meet their engagements, at the corner-men's own
price.--_v.t._ to supply with corners: to put in a corner: to put in a fix
or difficulty.--_adj._ COR'NERED, having corners: put in a difficult
position.--_n._ COR'NER-STONE, the stone which unites the two walls of a
building at a corner: the principal stone, esp. the corner of the
foundation of a building--hence (_fig._) something of very great
importance.--_n.pl._ COR'NER-TEETH, the lateral incisors of a horse, above
and below.--_adv._ COR'NER-WISE, with the corner in front: diagonally.--CUT
OFF A CORNER, to take a short cut; DONE IN A CORNER, done secretly: DRIVE
INTO A CORNER, to put in a fix: to bring to bay; KEEP A CORNER, to reserve
a place; THE CORNER (_slang_), Tattersall's betting-rooms in London, till
1867 at Hyde Park Corner; TURN THE CORNER, to go round the corner: to get
past a difficulty; WITHIN THE FOUR CORNERS OF, contained in (of a document,
&c.). [O. Fr. _corniere_--L. _cornu_.]

CORNET, kor'net, _n._ a brass treble wind-instrument, with a cup
mouthpiece--also COR'NET-À-PIS'TON, _-ons_: formerly the lowest grade of
commissioned officer in the cavalry--the office was abolished in 1871,
sub-lieutenant being substituted.--_ns._ COR'NETCY, the commission or rank
of a cornet; COR'NETIST, COR'NIST, a solo cornet-player. [Fr. _cornet_,
dim. of _corne_, a horn, trumpet. See CORN, lit. horn.]

CORNICE, kor'nis, _n._ (_classical archit._) the uppermost member of the
entablature, surmounting the frieze: plaster mouldings round the ceiling of
rooms at its junction with the walls.--_v.t._ to furnish with a
cornice.--_p.adj._ COR'NICED.--_ns._ COR'NICE-HOOK, -POLE, -RAIL, a hook,
pole, rail, for hanging pictures, curtains, &c.--_n._ COR'NICE-RING, a ring
or moulding on a cannon next below the muzzle-ring. [Fr.,--It., perh. Gr.
_kor[=o]nis_, a curved line; cf. L. _corona_.]

CORNICULATE, kor-nik'[=u]-l[=a]t, _adj._ horned: shaped like a horn.--_n._
COR'NICLE, a little horn or horn-like process.--_adj._ CORNIF'IC, producing
horn.--_n._ CORNIFIC[=A]'TION.--_adjs._ COR'NIFORM, in the form of a horn;
CORNI'GEROUS, bearing horns. [L. _cornu_, horn, _forma_, form, _ger[)e]re_,
to bear.]

CORNISH, korn'ish, _adj._ pertaining to Cornwall.--_n._ the people or
dialect of Cornwall.--_n._ CORN'ISHMAN.

CORNO, kor'no, _n._ the French horn.--CORNO DI BASSETTO, the basset-horn:
an organ-stop. [It.,--L. _cornu_, a horn.]

CORNOPEAN, kor-n[=o]'pe-an, _n._ Same as CORNET-À-PISTON. [See CORNET.]

CORNU, kor'n[=u], _n._ a horn (a horn-like part or process):--_pl._
COR'NUA.--_adj._ COR'NUAL.--CORNU AMMONIS, the hippocampus major. [L.]

CORNUBIANITE, kor-n[=u]'bi-an-[=i]t, _n._ a dark-blue laminated rock found
in Cornwall with granite.

CORNUCOPIA, kor-n[=u]-k[=o]'pi-a, _n._ the horn of plenty: according to the
fable, the horn of the goat that suckled Jupiter, placed among the stars as
an emblem of plenty.--_adj._ CORNUC[=O]'PIAN, plentiful. [L. _cornu_, and
_copia_, plenty.]

CORNULITES, kor-n[=u]-l[=i]'tez, _n.pl._ a genus of tubicolous annelids.

CORNUTE, kor-n[=u]t', _v.t._ (_obs._) to make a cuckold.--_adjs._ CORNUTE',
-D, having horns.--_n._ CORNUT'O (_obs._), a cuckold. [L. _cornutus_,
horned--_cornu_, horn.]

COROCORE, kor'[=o]-k[=o]r, _n._ a Malay form of boat.

CORODY. See CORRODY.

COROLLA, k[=o]-rol'a, _n._ the inner circle or whorl of the floral
envelopes.--_adjs._ COROLL[=A]'CEOUS; COROLLATE, -D.--_n._ COR'OLLET, a
floret of an aggregate flower.--_adjs._ COROLLIF'EROUS; COROLLI'FLOROUS,
COROLLIFL[=O]'RAL; COROLL'IFORM; COROLL'INE. [L. _corolla_, dim. of
_corona_, a crown.]

COROLLARY, kor-ol'a-ri, or kor'ol-a-ri, _n._ an inference or deduction from
recognised facts: a consequence or result. [L. _corollarium_, a
garland--_corolla_.]

CORONA, ko-r[=o]'na, _n._ (_archit._) the large, flat, projecting member of
a cornice which crowns the entablature: (_bot._) the crown-like appendage
at the top of compound flowers: (_astron._) the luminous circle or halo
which surrounds the moon during a solar total eclipse: (_anat._) a term
used to signify the upper surface of certain parts of the body: a round
pendent chandelier:--_pl._ usually COR[=O]'NÆ.--_n._ COR'ONAL, a crown or
garland: the frontal bone of the skull.--_adjs._ COR'ONAL, COR'ONARY,
pertaining to a crown, or to the top of the head; COR'ON[=A]TE, -D,
crowned, applied to shells with a row of projections round the apex.--_ns._
CORON[=A]'TION, the act of crowning a sovereign; COR[=O]'NIS, a sign (')
marking a crasis, as [Greek: kan] = [Greek: kai an]; COR'ONULE (_bot._), an
appendage like a small crown. [L. _corona_, a crown.]

CORONACH, kor'o-nah, _n._ a funeral dirge or lamentation. [Ir. _coranach_,
Gael. _corranach_.]

CORONER, kor'o-n[.e]r, _n._ an officer whose duty is to hold inquest into
the causes of accidental or suspicious deaths. [Late L. _coronator_--L.
_corona_.]

CORONET, kor'o-net, _n._ a small crown inferior to the sovereign's, worn by
the nobility: an ornamental head-dress: the part of a horse's pastern just
above the coffin--also COR'NET.--_adj._ COR'ONETED. [O. Fr., dim. of
_corone_, crown.]

CORONOID, kor'o-noid, or kor-[=o]'noid, _adj._ (_anat._) resembling the
beak of a crow, as the coronoid process of the lower jaw. [Gr.
_kor[=o]n[=e]_, a crow, _eidos_, form.]

COROZO, kor-[=o]'zo, _n._ a South American tree from whose seed is formed
vegetable ivory.

CORPORAL, kor'po-ral, _n._ in the British army, the grade of
non-commissioned officer next in rank to a sergeant; in the navy, a petty
officer under a master-at-arms.--_n._ COR'PORALSHIP. [Fr. _caporal_--It.
_caporale_--_capo_, the head--L. _caput_, the head.]

CORPORAL, kor'po-ral, _adj._ belonging or relating to the body: having a
body: not spiritual.--_n._ the cloth used in Catholic churches for covering
the elements of the Eucharist--also COR'PORALE, COR'PORAS (_obs._).--_n._
CORPORAL'ITY, state of being corporal--opp. to _Spirituality_.--_adv._
COR'PORALLY.--_adj._ COR'PORATE, legally united into a body so as to act as
an individual: belonging to a corporation: united.--_adv._
COR'PORATELY.--_ns._ COR'PORATENESS; CORPOR[=A]'TION, a body or society
authorised by law to act as one individual: rotundity of figure, a
pot-belly.--_adj._ COR'POR[=A]TIVE.--_n._ COR'POR[=A]TOR, a member of a
corporation.--_adj._ CORP[=O]'REAL, having a body or substance;
material.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ CORP[=O]'REALISE.--_ns._ CORP[=O]'REALISM,
materialism; CORP[=O]'REALIST, a materialist; CORPOREAL'ITY.--_adv._
CORP[=O]'REALLY.--_ns._ CORPOR[=E]'ITY; CORPORIFIC[=A]'TION, act of
corporifying.--_v.t._ CORPOR'IFY, to embody: solidify.--CORPORAL
PUNISHMENT, punishment inflicted on the body, as flogging, &c.--AGGREGATE
CORPORATION, a corporation consisting of several persons; SOLE CORPORATION,
a corporation which consists of one person and his successors. [L.
_corporalis_--_corpus_, _corp[)o]ris_, the body.]

CORPOSANT, kor'po-zant, _n._ St Elmo's fire, a ball of fire sometimes seen
about a ship during a storm. [Port.,--L. _corpus sanctum_, holy body.]

CORPS, k[=o]r, _n._ a division of an army forming a tactical unit--usually
CORPS D'ARMÉE, or _army corps_:--_pl._ CORPS (k[=o]rz).--CORPS DE BALLET,
the company of ballet dancers at a theatre; CORPS DE GARDE, the body of
soldiers stationed on guard, their station, a guard-house; CORPS
DIPLOMATIQUE, the whole diplomatic staff at a particular capital. [Fr.,
from L. _corpus_.]

CORPSE, korps, or kors, _n._ the dead body of a human being.--_ns._
CORPSE'-CAN'DLE, a light seen hovering over a grave--an omen of death;
CORPSE'-GATE, the lichgate (see LICHGATE). [M. E. _corps_, earlier
_cors_--O. Fr. _cors_, the body--L. _corpus_.]

CORPUS, kor'pus, _n._ a body: any special structure or function in the
body; the whole body of literature on any subject.--_ns._ COR'PULENCE,
COR'PULENCY, fleshiness of body; excessive fatness.--_adj._ COR'PULENT,
fleshy or fat.--_adv._ COR'PULENTLY.--_n._ COR'PUSCLE, a minute particle; a
physical atom--also CORPUS'CULE.--_adjs._ CORPUS'CULAR, CORPUSCUL[=A]'RIAN,
pertaining to corpuscles.--_ns._ CORPUSCUL[=A]'RIAN, one who holds the
corpuscular philosophy; CORPUSCULAR'ITY.--CORPUS CHRISTI, the festival in
honour of the Consecrated Host, held on the Thursday after the festival of
the Trinity; CORPUS DELICTI, a criminal law term in Scotland to signify the
body or substance of the crime charged.--CORPUSCULAR THEORY OF LIGHT, or
EMISSION THEORY (see EMIT). [L. _corpus_, the body.]

CORRADIATE, kor-r[=a]d'[=i]-[=a]t, _v.i._ to radiate together.--_n._
CORRADI[=A]'TION.

CORRAL, kor-al', _n._ an enclosure for cattle, &c.--_v.t._ to form such.
[Sp.]

CORRECT, kor-ekt', _v.t._ to make right: to remove faults: to punish: to
counterbalance: to bring into a normal state.--_adj._ made right or
straight: free from faults: true.--_adjs._ CORRECT'ABLE,
CORRECT'IBLE.--_adv._ CORRECT'LY.--_n._ CORREC'TION, amendment: punishment:
bodily chastisement.--_adjs._ CORREC'TIONAL, CORRECT'IVE, tending, or
having the power, to correct.--_ns._ CORREC'TIONER (_Shak._), one who
administers correction; CORRECT'IVE, that which corrects; CORRECT'NESS;
CORRECT'OR, he who, or that which, corrects: a director or
governor.--_adj._ CORRECT'ORY, corrective.--UNDER CORRECTION, subject to
correction--often used as a formal expression of deference to a superior
authority. [L. _corrig[)e]re_, _correctum_--_cor_, inten., _reg[)e]re_, to
rule.]

CORREG'IDOR, ko-rej'i-d[=o]r, _n._ the chief magistrate of a Spanish town.

CORRELATE, kor'e-l[=a]t, _v.i._ to be mutually related, as father and
son.--_n._ CORREL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CORREL'ATIVE, mutually or reciprocally
related.--_n._ a person or thing correspondingly related to another person
or thing.--_adv._ CORREL'ATIVELY.--_ns._ CORREL'ATIVENESS, CORRELATIV'ITY.
[Coined from L. _cor_, with, and RELATE.]

CORRELIGIONIST. See CO-RELIGIONIST.

CORREPTION, kor-ep'shun, _n._ shortening in pronunciation: (_obs._)
reproof.

CORRESPOND, kor-e-spond', _v.i._ to answer, suit, agree (with _to_,
_with_): to hold intercourse, esp. by sending and receiving letters.--_ns._
CORRESPOND'ENCE, CORRESPOND'ENCY, suitableness, harmony, relation of
agreement: friendly intercourse: communication by means of letters: letters
which pass between correspondents.--_adj._ CORRESPOND'ENT, agreeing with:
suitable.--_n._ one with whom intercourse is kept up by letters: one who
contributes letters to a journal.--_adv._ CORRESPOND'ENTLY.--_adj._
CORRESPOND'ING, correspondent: answering: suiting: carrying on
correspondence by letters.--_adv._ CORRESPOND'INGLY.--_adj._
CORRESPON'SIVE, corresponding: answering.--DOCTRINE OF CORRESPONDENCES, the
theory of Swedenborg that there is a spiritual antitype corresponding to
every natural object, and that Scripture contains the key to these
correspondences. [Coined from L. _cor_, with, and _respond[=e]re_.]

CORRIDOR, kor'i-d[=o]r, _n._ a passage-way or open gallery communicating
with separate chambers.--_n._ CORR'IDOR-TRAIN, a train in which one can
pass along from one carriage to another without having to leave the train.
[Fr.,--It. _corridore_, a runner, a running--It. _correre_, to run--L.
_curr[)e]re_.]

CORRIE, kor'i, _n._ a term applied in Scotland and Ireland to semicircular
recesses or cirques in mountains, generally flanked by steep and lofty
hills. [Gael. _coire_, a cauldron, or large pot.]

CORRIGENDUM, kor-i-jen'dum, _n._ that which requires correction:--_pl._
CORRIGEN'DA, corrections to be made in a book. [L., gerundive of
_corrig[)e]re_, to correct.]

CORRIGENT, kor'i-jent, _adj._ corrective.--_n._ a corrective.

CORRIGIBLE, kor'i-ji-bl, _adj._ that may be corrected: open to
correction.--_n._ CORRIGIBIL'ITY.

CORRIVAL, kor-r[=i]'val, _n._ a fellow-rival: a competitor: an
equal.--_adj._ contending: emulous.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ to rival: to vie
with.--_ns._ CORR[=I]'VALRY; CORR[=I]'VALSHIP. [L. _con_, with, and RIVAL.]

CORROBORATE, kor-ob'o-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to confirm: to make more
certain.--_adjs._ CORROB'ORANT, CORROB'ORATIVE, tending to confirm.--_n._
that which corroborates.--_ns._ CORROBOR[=A]'TION, confirmation;
CORROB'ORATOR.--_adj._ CORROB'ORATORY, corroborative. [L. _cor_, inten.,
and _robor[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to make strong. See ROBUST.]

CORROBOREE, ko-rob'[=o]-ri, _n._ Australian name for a gathering of
aborigines, held on moonlight nights, when they engage in dancing and other
exercises.

CORRODE, kor-[=o]d', _v.t._ to eat away by degrees: to rust.--_v.i._ to be
eaten away.--_adj._ CORROD'ENT, having the power of corroding.--_n._ that
which corrodes.--_ns._ CORRODIBIL'ITY, CORROSIBIL'ITY,
CORR[=O]'SIBLENESS.--_adjs._ CORROD'IBLE, CORROS'IBLE, that may be
corroded.--_n._ CORR[=O]'SION, act of eating or wasting away.--_adj._
CORROS'IVE, having the quality of eating away.--_n._ that which has the
power of corroding.--_adv._ CORROS'IVELY.--_n._ CORROS'IVENESS.--CORROSIVE
SUBLIMATE, the popular name of the highly poisonous bichloride of mercury
(mercuric chloride). [L. _cor_, inten., _rod[)e]re_, _rosum_, to gnaw.]

CORRODY, CORODY, kor'o-di, _n._ an allowance: pension: originally the right
of the lord to claim free lodging from the vassal. [O. Fr. _conroi_.]

CORRUGATE, kor'oo-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to wrinkle or draw into folds.--_p.adjs._
CORR'UGANT; CORR'UGATED.--_ns._ CORRUG[=A]'TION, the act of wrinkling or
being wrinkled: a wrinkle; CORR'UGATOR (_anat._) one of the two muscles
that wrinkle the brow.--CORRUGATED METAL, metal passed between pairs of
rollers with ridged surfaces, the ridges of one fitting into the hollows of
the other, the plates operated on being bent and compressed into the wavy
outline of the rolls. [L. _cor_, inten., _rug[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to
wrinkle--_ruga_, a wrinkle.]

CORRUPT, kor-upt', _v.t._ to make putrid: to defile: to mar: to debase: to
bribe.--_v.i._ to rot: to lose purity.--_adj._ putrid: depraved: defiled:
not genuine: full of errors.--_ns._ CORRUPT'ER; CORRUPTIBIL'ITY,
CORRUPT'IBLENESS.--_adj._ CORRUPT'IBLE, liable to be corrupted.--_adv._
CORRUPT'IBLY.--_ns._ CORRUP'TION, rottenness: putrid matter: impurity:
bribery; CORRUP'TIONIST, one who defends or who practises
corruption.--_adj._ CORRUPT'IVE, having the quality of corrupting.--_adv._
CORRUPT'LY.--_n._ CORRUPT'NESS. [L. _cor_, inten., and _rump[)e]re_,
_ruptum_, to break.]

CORSAGE, kor's[=a]j, _n._ the bodice or waist of a woman's dress. [O.
Fr.,--_cors_--L. _corpus_, the body.]

CORSAIR, kor's[=a]r, _n._ a pirate: a pirate's vessel. [Fr. _corsaire_, one
who makes the course or ranges--L. _cursus_, a running--_curr[)e]re_, to
run.]

CORSE, kors, _n._ a poetic form of CORPSE.

CORSELET. Same as CORSLET.

CORSET, kor'set, _n._ a closely-fitting inner bodice, stiffened with
whalebone, &c., and laced up: stays. [Dim. of O. Fr. _cors_--L. _corpus_,
the body.]

CORSLET, CORSELET, kors'let, _n._ a cuirass, formerly the usual
body-covering of pikemen, chiefly of leather, and pistol-proof.--_p.adj._
CORS'LETED. [Fr. _corselet_, dim. of O. Fr. _cors_--L. _corpus_, the body.]

CORSNED, kors'ned, _n._ a kind of ordeal, wherein the accused was required
to swallow consecrated bread and cheese; if it stuck in his throat he was
pronounced guilty. [A.S. _corsn['æ]d_--_cor_, trial, from _coren_, pa.p. of
_céosan_, to choose, and _sn['æ]d_, a piece, from _snídan_, to cut.]

CORTEGE, kor-t[=a]zh', _n._ a train of attendants: a procession, a funeral
procession. [Fr.,--It. _corteggio_--_corte_, court.]

CORTES, kor'tes, _n._ the parliament of Spain and Portugal. [Sp., pl. of
_corte_, a court.]

CORTEX, kor'teks, _n._ the bark or skin of a plant: a covering.--_adjs._
COR'TICAL, pertaining to the cortex: external; COR'TICATE, -D, furnished
with bark; CORTICIF'[.E]ROUS, producing bark; CORTIC'IFORM, resembling
bark; COR'TICOLE, CORTIC'OLOUS, growing on bark; COR'TICOSE, barky. [L.
_cortex_, _corticis_, bark.]

CORTILE, kor-t[=e]'le, _n._ an enclosed courtyard within a building,
generally roofless. [It.]

CORUNDUM, ko-run'dum, _n._ a mineral consisting of mere alumina, yet of
great specific gravity--about four times that of water--and second in
hardness only to the diamond. [Hind. _kurund_.]

CORUSCATE, kor'us-k[=a]t, _v.i._ to sparkle: to throw off flashes of
light.--_adj._ CORUS'CANT, flashing.--_n._ CORUSC[=A]'TION, a glittering:
sudden flash of light. [L. _corusc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to vibrate,
glitter.]

CORVÉE, kor-v[=a]', _n._ the obligations on the inhabitants of districts to
perform gratuitous labour (such as the maintenance of roads) for the
sovereign or feudal lord. [Fr.,--Low L. _corrogata_--L.
_corrog[=a]re_--_cor_, together, _reg[=a]re_, to ask.]

CORVET. Same as CURVET.

CORVETTE, kor-vet', _n._ a flush-decked vessel, ship, or barque, rigged,
having only one tier of guns, either on the upper or main deck. [Fr.,--Sp.
_corbeta_--L. _corb[=i]ta_, a slow-sailing ship, from _corbis_, a basket.]

CORVINE, kor'v[=i]n, _adj._ pertaining to the crow.--_n._ COR'VUS, the
typical genus of _Corvinæ_: a hooked ram for destroying walls: a southern
constellation: a grappling-hook in ancient Roman naval warfare. [L.
_corvinus_--_corvus_, a crow.]

CORYBANT, kor'i-bant, _n._ a priest of Cybele, whose rites were accompanied
with noisy music and wild dances:--Eng. _pl._ COR'YBANTS; L. _pl._
CORYBANTES (kor-i-ban't[=e]z).--_adj._ CORYBAN'TIC, wildly excited.--_n._
COR'YBANTISM. [Gr. _korybas_, _korybantos_.]

CORYDALINE, kor'id-a-lin, _n._ an alkaloid obtained from the root of
_Corydalis tuberosa_.

CORYDON, kor'i-don, _n._ generic name for a rustic. [L. and Gr. proper name
applied to a shepherd.]

CORYLUS, kor'i-lus, _n._ a genus of small trees, including the common
hazel. [L.]

CORYMB, kor'imb, _n._ (_bot._) a convex flower-cluster of indefinite
inflorescence.--_adjs._ CORYM'BIATE, -D; CORYMBIF'EROUS; CORYM'BOSE,
CORYM'BOUS, CORYM'BULOUS. [L. _corymbus_--Gr. _korymbos_, a cluster.]

CORYMBUS, ko-rim'bus, _n._ the knot on the top of the head into which girls
gathered their hair. [Gr.]

CORYPHA, kor'i-fa, _n._ a genus of tropical Asian palms with fan-shaped
leaves. [Gr. _koryph[=e]_, the top.]

CORYPHÆUS, kor-i-f[=e]'us, _n._ the chief or leader, esp. the leader of a
chorus.--_n._ CORYPHÉE (kor-i-f[=a]'), the principal _danseuse_ in the
ballet. [L.,--Gr. _koryphaios_--_koryph[=e]_, the head.]

CORYPHENE, kor'i-f[=e]n, _n._ a fish of the genus _Coryphæna_, which
includes the dolphins. [Gr.]

CORYSTES, ko-ris't[=e]z, _n.pl._ a genus of long-armed crabs, of family
_Corystidæ_. [Gr. _korys_, helmet.]

CORYZA, ko-r[=i]'za, _n._ a cold in the head. [L.,--Gr.]

COSAQUE, kos-ak', _n._ a cracker bon-bon.

COSCINOMANCY, kos'i-no-man-si, _n._ an ancient mode of divination by a
sieve and pair of shears. [Gr. _koskinon_, a sieve, _manteia_, divination.]

COSE, k[=o]z, _v.i._ to make one's self cosy.--_adj._ COSH (_Scot._), cosy,
snug. [See COSY.]

COSECANT, k[=o]-s[=e]'kant, _n._ (_trig._) the secant of the complement of
an angle.

COSEISMAL, k[=o]-s[=i]s'mal, _adj._ experiencing an earthquake shock
simultaneously at all points.--Also COSEIS'MIC.

CO-SENTIENT, k[=o]-sen'shi-ent, _adj._ perceiving together.

COSH. See COSE.

COSHER, kosh'[.e]r, _v.t._ to pamper, to coddle.--_v.i._ to chat in a
friendly way.

COSHERY, kosh'[.e]r-i, _n._ the ancient right of an Irish chief to quarter
himself and his retainers on his tenantry--also COSH'ERING.--_v.i._
COSH'ER, to live on dependants.--_n._ COSH'ERER. [Ir. _coisir_, a feast.]

COSIER. Same as COZIER.

CO-SIGNATORY, k[=o]-sig'na-t[=o]-ri, _adj._ uniting with others in signing:
one who does so.--_adj._ CO-SIGNIF'ICATIVE, having the same signification.

COSINAGE, kus'n[=a]j, _n._ collateral relationship.--Also COS'ENAGE.

CO-SINE, k[=o]'-s[=i]n, _n._ the sine of the complement of a given angle
(whose co-sine it is).

COSMETIC, koz-met'ik, _adj._ improving beauty, esp. that of the
complexion.--_n._ a preparation for beautifying the skin and hair.--_adj._
COSMET'ICAL.--_adv._ COSMET'ICALLY.--_v.t._ COSMET'ICISE.--_n._
COSMET'ICISM. [Gr. _kosm[=e]tikos_--_kosmein_--_kosmos_, order.]

COSMIC. See COSMOS.

COSMOGONY, koz-mog'o-ni, _n._ the theory of the origin of the universe and
its inhabitants--also COSMOG'ENY.--_adjs._ COSMOGONET'IC; COSMOG'ONAL,
COSMOGON'IC, -AL, relating to cosmogony.--_n._ COSMOG'ONIST, one who
speculates on the origin of the universe. [Gr. _kosmogonia_--_kosmos_, and
root of _gignesthai_, to be born.]

COSMOGRAPHY, koz-mog'ra-fi, _n._ a description of the world: the science of
the constitution of the universe.--_n._ COSMOG'RAPHER.--_adjs._
COSMOGRAPH'IC, -AL. [Gr.,--_kosmos_, and _graphein_, to write.]

COSMOLOGY, koz-mol'o-ji, _n._ the science of the universe as a whole: a
treatise on the structure and parts of the system of creation.--_adj._
COSMOLOG'ICAL.--_n._ COSMOL'OGIST, one versed in cosmology.--_adj._
COSMOPLAS'TIC, moulding the universe. [Gr. _kosmos_, and _logia_,
discourse.]

COSMOPOLITAN, koz-mo-pol'i-tan, _n._ a citizen of the world: one free from
local or national prejudices--also COSMOP'OLITE.--_adj._ belonging to all
parts of the world: unprejudiced.--_ns._ COSMOPOL'ITANISM, COSMOP'OLITISM,
COSMOPOL'ICY (_Shelley_).--_adjs._ COSMOPOL'ITIC, -POLIT'ICAL. [Gr.
_kosmopolit[=e]s_--_kosmos_, and _polit[=e]s_, a citizen--_polis_, a city.]

COSMORAMA, koz-mo-rä'ma, _n._ a view, or a series of views, of different
parts of the world.--_adj._ COSMORAM'IC. [Gr. _kosmos_, and _horama_, a
spectacle.]

COSMOS, koz'mos, _n._ the world as an orderly or systematic whole--opp. to
_Chaos_: order.--_adjs._ COS'MIC, relating to the cosmos: orderly;
COS'MICAL, cosmic: (_astron._) happening at sunrise: rising with the
sun.--_adv._ COS'MICALLY.--_ns._ COS'MISM, the notion of the cosmos as a
self-existing whole; COS'MIST, a secularist; COS'MOCRAT, ruler of the
world.--_adj._ COSMOCRAT'IC.--_ns._ COS'MOLABE, a kind of astrolabe--also
_Pantocosm_; COSMOL'ATRY, worship paid to the world; COSMOM'ETRY, the art
of measuring the world; COS'MOSPHERE, an apparatus for showing the position
of the earth at any given time with reference to the fixed stars;
COSMOTH[=E]'ISM, the belief that identifies God with the cosmos:
pantheism.--_adjs._ COSMOTHET'IC, -AL, assuming an external world. [Gr.]

CO-SPHERED, k[=o]-sf[=e]rd', _adj._ being in the same sphere.

COSS, kos, _n._ a measure of distance in India, averaging about 1¾ mile.
[Hindi _k[=o]s_--Sans. _kroça_, a call.]

COSSACK, kos'ak, _n._ one of a people in south-eastern Russia, forming
splendid light cavalry. [Turk.]

COSSAS, kos'az, _n.pl._ plain muslins. [East Ind.]

COSSET, kos'set, _n._ a lamb reared in the house without a dam: a
pet.--_v.t._ to fondle. [Ety. dub.]

COST, kost, _v.t._ to bring a certain price: to require to be laid out or
suffered:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ cost.--_n._ what is laid out or suffered to
obtain anything: (_pl._) expenses of a lawsuit.--_adj._ COST'-FREE, free of
charge.--_n._ COST'LINESS.--_adv._ COST'LY, of great cost: high-priced:
valuable.--COST PRICE, the price which the merchant pays.--PRIME COST, the
price of production, without regard to profit. [O. Fr. _couster_ (Fr.
_coûter_)--L. _const[=a]re_, to stand at.]

COSTAL, kos'tal, _adj._ relating to the ribs, or to the side of the
body.--_adjs._ COS'T[=A]TE, -D, ribbed: having the appearance of ribs. [L.
_costa_, a rib.]

COSTARD, kos'tard, _n._ a large kind of apple: the human head
(contemptuously).--_ns._ COS'TARDMONGER, COS'TER, COS'TERMONGER, a seller
of apples and other fruit: an itinerant seller of fruit: a term of abuse.
[Perh. from L. _costa_, a rib.]

COSTEAN, kos-t[=e]n', _v.i._ to try to find a lode by sinking pits down to
bed-rock.--_ns._ COST'-BOOK, a book containing the names and shares of the
joint adventurers in a mine; COSTEAN'ING; COSTEAN'-PIT. [Corn. _cothas_,
dropped, _stean_, tin.]

COSTIVE, kos'tiv, _adj._ having the motion of the bowels too slow:
constipated.--_adv._ COS'TIVELY.--_n._ COS'TIVENESS, slowness in the action
of the bowels. [Fr. _constipé_. See CONSTIPATE.]

COSTMARY, kost'm[=a]r-i, _n._ a herbaceous perennial composite of southern
Europe, introduced from Italy in 1568, and cultivated in gardens for the
fragrance of the leaves. [L. _costum_--Gr. _kostos_, an Oriental aromatic
plant, and _Maria_, the Virgin Mary.]

COSTREL, kos'trel, _n._ a kind of bottle with ears, to be hung at the
waist. [O. Fr. _costerel_.]

COSTUME, kos-t[=u]m', or kos't[=u]m, _n._ the manner of dressing prevalent
at a particular period or place: dress, esp. a woman's dress.--_v.t._ to
dress.--_p.adj._ COSTUMED'.--_ns._ COSTUM'ER, COSTUM'IER, one who makes or
deals in costumes. [Fr.,--It.,--Low L. _costuma_--L. _consuetudo_, custom.]

CO-SUPREME, k[=o]-s[=u]-pr[=e]m', _n._ (_obs._) a sharer with another in
supremacy.

CO-SURETY, k[=o]-sh[=oo]r'ti, _n._ one who is surety along with others.

COSY, COZY, k[=o]'zi, _adj._ (_Scot._) snug: comfortable.--_n._ a covering
used for a teapot, to keep the tea warm--also TEA'-C[=O]'SY.--_adv._
C[=O]'SILY. [Ety. dub.]

COT, kot, _n._ a small dwelling, a cottage.--_ns._ COT'-FOLK (_Scot._),
cottars; COT'-HOUSE, a house occupied by a cottar; COT'-LAND, land
belonging to a cottage; COT'-QUEAN (_Shak._), a man who busies himself with
women's affairs.--_adj._ COT'TED, lined with cots.--_n._ COT'-TOWN, a
number of cot-houses. [A.S. _cot_; cf. Ice. _kot_, Dut. _kot_.]

COT, kot, _n._ a small bed: a swinging bed of canvas, suspended from the
beams of a ship, for the officers: a bed for a child, a crib.
[Anglo-Ind.--Hind. _kh[=a]t_.]

COT, kot, _n._ a small boat. [Ir.]

CO-TANGENT, k[=o]-tan'jent, _n._ the tangent of the complement of an angle.

COTE, k[=o]t, _n._ a cot: a place for animals, as _dove-cote_ or
_dove-cot_, _sheep-cote_. [A.S. _cote_. Cf. COT (1).]

COTE, k[=o]t, _v.t._ to pass by: to outstrip, leave behind. [Der. obscure;
perh. conn. with COAST.]

COTEMPORANEOUS, -TEMPORARY. Same as CONTEMPORANEOUS, -TEMPORARY.

CO-TENANT, k[=o]-ten'ant, _n._ one who is a tenant along with
another.--_n._ CO-TEN'ANCY.

COTERIE, k[=o]'te-r[=e], _n._ a number of persons meeting familiarly for
social, literary, or other purposes. [Fr.; orig. a number of peasants
obtaining a joint tenure of land from a lord--Low L. _cota_, a hut. See
COT.]

COTERMINOUS. Same as CONTERMINOUS.

COTHURN, k[=o]'thurn, COTHURNUS, k[=o]-thur'nus, _n._ a buskin or high boot
laced in front, worn in tragic performances. [L. _cothurnus_--Gr.
_kothornos_.]

COTICULAR, ko-tik'[=u]-lar, _adj._ pertaining to whetstones. [L.]

CO-TIDAL, k[=o]-t[=i]d'al, _adj._ noting an equality in the tides, applied
to lines on a chart or map passing through places that have high tide at
the same time.

COTILLION, ko-til'yun, COTILLON, ko-ti'yong, _n._ a brisk dance by eight
persons. [Fr.,--_cotte_, a coat--Low L. _cotta_, a tunic. See COAT.]

COTINGA, k[=o]-ting'ga, _n._ a genus of passerine birds of bright plumage,
represented by six species in central and in tropical South America.
[Native name.]

COTISE, COTTISE, k[=o]'tis, _n._ (_her._) one of the diminutives of the
bend (q.v.).--_v.t._ to border a bend, &c., with cotises, barrulets, &c.
[Fr. _cotice_; origin obscure.]

COTONEASTER, k[=o]-t[=o]-ni-as't[.e]r, _n._ a genus of shrubs or small
trees, closely allied to the hawthorn and medlar. [Formed from L.
_cotonea_, quince.]

COTSWOLD, kots'wold, _n._ a breed of sheep.--COTSWOLD LIONS, sheep.

COTTA, kot'a, _n._ a surplice. [Low L. _cotta_.]

COTTABUS, kot'a-bus, _n._ an amusement in ancient Greece among young men,
consisting in throwing wine into a vessel, success at which betokened
fortune in love. [L.,--Gr. _kottabos_.]

COTTAGE, kot'[=a]j, _n._ a small dwelling-house, esp. of labourers, varying
greatly in size, appearance, and comfort: a country residence.--_adj._
COTT'AGED, covered with cottages.--_n._ COTT'AGER, one who dwells in a
cottage, esp. of labourers.--COTTAGE ALLOTMENTS, pieces of land allotted to
cottagers to be cultivated as gardens; COTTAGE PIANO, a small upright
piano. [See COT.]

COTTAR, COTTER, kot'[.e]r, _n._ (_Scot._) a peasant occupying a cot or
cottage for which he has to give labour.--_ns._ COTT'IER, a cottar: an
Irish tenant; COTT'IERISM, the cottier system of land tenure.

COTTER, kot'[.e]r, _n._ a pin or wedge for fastening and tightening.
[Origin obscure.]

COTTON, kot'n, _n._ a soft substance like fine wool, got from the pods of
the cotton-plant: cloth made of cotton.--_adj._ made of cotton.--_v.t._ to
provide with cotton.--_v.i._ to agree: to be attached to (the connection of
the intransitive meanings is unknown).--_ns._ COTTONADE', a name given to
an inferior kind of cotton cloth; COTT'ON-GIN, a machine for separating the
seeds from the fibre of cotton; COTT'ON-GRASS, a genus of _Cyperaceæ_ in
which the _perigone_ or covering of united bracts, which in this order
enclose the ripening ovary, is developed into long, silky, or cottony
hairs; COTTONOC'RACY, the cotton planting or the cotton manufacturing
interest; COTT'ON-PLANT, one of various plants of the genus _Gossypium_,
natural order _Malvaceæ_, yielding the textile substance cotton;
COTT'ON-PRESS, a press for compressing cotton into bales; COTT'ON-SEED, the
seed of the cotton-plant, yielding a valuable oil; COTT'ON-SPIN'NER, one
who spins cotton, or employs those who do; COTT'ON-TAIL, the ordinary
United States rabbit; COTT'ON-THIS'TLE, a strong thistle covered with a
cottony down; COTT'ON-TREE, the American cotton-wood: the Indian _Bombax
malabaricum_; COTT'ON-WEED, cudweed or everlasting; COTT'ON-WOOD, any one
of several American species of poplar; COTT'ON-WOOL, cotton in its raw or
woolly state.--_adj._ COTT'ONY, like cotton: soft: downy. [Fr. _coton_--Ar.
_qutun_.]

COTYLE, kot'i-l[=e], _n._ an ancient Greek drinking-cup: (_zool._) a
cup-like cavity:--_pl._ COT'YLÆ, or COT'YLES.--_adj._ COTYL'IFORM. [Gr.]

COTYLEDON, kot-i-l[=e]'don, _n._ (_bot._) the term applied to the
seed-leaves of the embryo: the seed-leaf.--_adjs._ COTYL[=E]'DONARY;
COTYL[=E]'DONOUS, pertaining to or having cotyledons or seed-lobes;
COT'YLOID, cup-shaped. [L.,--Gr. _kotyl[=e]d[=o]n_--_kotyl[=e]_, a cup.]

COUCAL, k[=oo]'kal, _n._ a genus of common bush-birds in Africa and India.

COUCH, kowch, _v.t._ to lay down on a bed, &c.: to lower: to level: to
arrange in language, to express: to depress or remove a cataract in the
eye.--_v.i._ to lie down for the purpose of sleep, concealment, &c.: to
bend or stoop in reverence.--_n._ any place for rest or sleep: a bed: the
lair of a wild beast.--_adj._ COUCH'ANT, couching or lying down: (_her._)
of a beast lying down with his head up.--_ns._ COUCH'-FELL'OW, COUCH'-MATE,
a bed-fellow; COUCHING.--COUCH A SPEAR, to fix it in its rest at the side
of the armour. [Fr. _coucher_, to lie down--L. _colloc[=a]re_, to
place--_com_, together, _locus_, a place.]

COUCH, kowch, COUCH-GRASS, kowch'-gras, _n._ a grass of the same genus with
wheat, but a widespread and troublesome weed. [A variant of QUITCH.]

COUCHEE, k[=oo]'sh[=a], _n._ an evening party or reception. [Fr. _couché_.
See COUCH.]

COUGAR, k[=oo]'gar, _n._ an American animal, same as the puma. [Fr.
_couguar_, from native name.]

COUGH, kof, _n._ an effort of the lungs to throw off injurious matter,
accompanied by a harsh sound, proceeding from the throat.--_v.i._ to make
this effort.--_v.t._ to expel from the throat or lungs by a cough.--_ns._
COUGH'-DROP, -LOZ'ENGE, a sweetmeat taken to cure coughing; COUGH'ER;
COUGH'ING,--COUGH DOWN, to drown a speaker's voice by coughing, so that he
must stop. [M. E. _coughen_; cf. Dut. _kuchen_, Ger. _keuchen_, _keichen_,
to gasp.]

COULD, kood, _pa.t._ of CAN. [M. E. _coude_, _couth_--A.S. _cúðe_ for
_cunðe_, was able; _l_ is inserted from the influence of _would_ and
_should_.]

COULÉE, k[=oo]-l[=a]', or k[=oo]'li, _n._ a ravine, esp. one worn out by
water. [Fr.,--_couler_, to flow.]

COULEUR, kool'[=a]r, _n._ French word for COLOUR.--_n._ COUL'EUR-DE-ROSE',
rose colour.--_adv._ in a favourable light: fanciful.

COULISSE, k[=oo]-lis', _n._ a piece of grooved wood, as the slides in which
the side-scenes of a theatre run--hence, the side-scene of a theatre.
[Fr.,--_couler_, to glide, to flow--L. _col[=a]re_, to flow.]

COULOIR, kool-wär, _n._ a gully filled with snow. [Fr.]

COULOMB, koo-lom', _n._ the unit of quantity in measuring current
electricity: the quantity furnished by a current of one ampere in one
second. [From the French physicist, C. A. de _Coulomb_ (1736-1806).]

COULTER. See COLTER.

COUMARINE, koo'ma-rin, _n._ a crystalline compound obtained in Tonka beans,
&c.--also CU'MARIN.--_adjs._ COU'MARIC, COUMARIL'IC.

COUNCIL, kown'sil, _n._ an assembly called together for deliberation or
advice: the body of men constituting such an assembly: the body of men
directing the affairs of the city: an assembly of ecclesiastics met to
regulate doctrine or discipline (_diocesan_, _provincial_, _national_,
_general_, or _oecumenical_).--_ns._ COUN'CIL-BOARD, the board or table
round which a council meets for deliberation: the council itself;
COUN'CIL-CHAM'BER, the room where a council is held; COUN'CILLOR, a member
of a council, esp. of a common council; COUN'CIL-MAN, a member of a
municipal council.--COUNCIL OF WAR, a conference of military or naval
officers called to meet and consult with the commander.--GENERAL COUNCIL,
one called by an invitation to the church at large, also OECUMENICAL, if
received by the Catholic Church in general--as the first seven,
325-787.--IN COUNCIL, in the council-chamber: in giving
advice.--PRIVY-COUNCIL (see PRIVY). [Fr. _concile_--L. _concilium_.]

COUNSEL, kown'sel, _n._ consultation: deliberation: advice: plan: purpose:
one who gives counsel, a barrister or advocate.--_v.t._ to give advice: to
warn:--_pr.p._ coun'selling; _pa.p._ coun'selled.--_n._ COUN'SEL-KEEP'ER
(_Shak._), one who can keep counsel or a secret.--_adjs._ COUN'SEL-KEEP'ING
(_Shak._), keeping counsel or secrets; COUN'SELLABLE, that may be
counselled.--_ns._ COUN'SELLOR, one who counsels: a barrister;
COUN'SELLORSHIP.--COUNSEL OF PERFECTION, a declaration of our Lord's, not
absolutely imperative, but commended as the means of reaching greater
perfection; KEEP COUNSEL, to keep a secret; KING'S COUNSEL (K.C.), a
barrister-at-law appointed by letters-patent--the office is honorary, but
gives the right of precedence in all the courts. [Fr. _conseil_--L.
_consilium_, advice--_consul[)e]re_, to consult.]

COUNT, kownt, _n._ on the Continent, a title of nobility equal in rank to
an English earl:--_fem._ COUNT'ESS, the wife of a count or earl (fem. of
_earl_).--_ns._ COUNT'SHIP, a count's dignity or domain (also used as a
title); COUN'TY, a portion of a country separated for the administration of
justice: a shire; COUN'TY-FAM'ILY, a family of the nobility or gentry
(COUN'TY-PEOPLE), with estates and a seat in the county. [O. Fr.
_conte_--L. _comes_, _comitis_, a companion, _con_, with, _[=i]re_, _itum_,
to go.]

COUNT, kownt, _v.t._ to number, sum up: to ascribe: esteem:
consider.--_v.i._ to add to or increase a number by being counted to it: to
depend.--_n._ act of numbering: the number counted: a particular charge in
an indictment.--_adj._ COUNT'ABLE, capable of being counted.--_ns._
COUNT'ER, he who or that which counts: that which indicates a number: a
piece of metal, &c., used in reckoning: a table on which money is counted
or goods laid; COUNT'ING-HOUSE, COUNT'ING-ROOM, the house or room in which
merchants keep their accounts and transact business.--_adj._ COUNT'LESS,
that cannot be counted: innumerable.--_n._ COUNT'-WHEEL, a wheel with
notched edge controlling the stroke of a clock in sounding the hours. [O.
Fr. _cunter_ (Fr. _compter_)--L. _comput[=a]re_.]

COUNTENANCE, kown'ten-ans, _n._ the face: the expression of the face:
appearance.--_v.t._ to favour or approve.--_n._ COUN'TENANCER.--CHANGE
COUNTENANCE, to change the expression of the face; HIS COUNTENANCE FELL, he
became dejected or angry; IN COUNTENANCE, unabashed--opp. to _Out of
countenance_. [O. Fr. _contenance_--L. _continentia_, restraint,
demeanour--L. _contin[=e]re_, to contain.]

COUNTER, kown't[.e]r, _adv._ against: in opposition.--_adj._ contrary:
opposite.--_n._ that which is counter of opposite: (_mus._) the voice-part
set in immediate contrast with the air: (_fencing_) a parry in which one
foil follows the other in a small circle: the part of a horse's breast
between the shoulders and under the neck: (_naut._) the part of a ship
between the water-line and the knuckle of the stern.--_v.t._ COUNTERACT',
to act counter or in opposition to: to hinder or defeat.--_n._
COUNTERAC'TION.--_adj._ COUNTERACT'IVE, tending to counteract.--_n._ one
who or that which counteracts.--_adv._ COUNTERACT'IVELY.--_ns._
COUN'TER-AG'ENT, anything which counteracts; COUN'TER-APPROACH', a work
thrown up outside a besieged place to command or check the approaches of
the besieger; COUN'TER-ATTRAC'TION, attraction in an opposite
direction.--_adj._ COUN'TER-ATTRACT'IVE, attracting in an opposite
direction.--_v.t._ COUNTERBAL'ANCE, to balance by weight on the opposite
side: to act against with equal weight, power, or influence.--_ns._
COUN'TERBALANCE, an equal weight, power, or agency working in opposition;
COUN'TERBASE (see CONTRABASS); COUN'TER-BATT'ERY (_mil._), a battery
erected to oppose another; COUN'TER-BLAST, something done in opposition to
another thing; COUN'TER-BOND, a bond to protect from contingent loss one
who has given bond for another.--_v.t._ COUN'TER-BRACE (_naut._), to brace
or fasten (the head-yards and after-yards) in opposite ways.--_n._ the
lee-brace of the fore-topsail-yard.--_n._ COUN'TERBUFF, a stroke that stops
motion or causes a recoil.--_v.t._ to drive back by such.--_ns._
COUN'TER-CAST (_Spens._), a contrary cast, counterplot, trick;
COUN'TER-CAST'ER (_Shak._), one who casts accounts: a book-keeper--used in
contempt; COUN'TER-CHANGE, (_Shak._), exchange, reciprocation.--_p.adj._
COUN'TERCHANGED', exchanged: (_her._) intermixed or set one against the
other, as the colours of the field and charge.--_n._ COUN'TER-CHARGE, a
charge brought forward in opposition to another charge.--_v.t._
COUN'TERCHARM, to destroy or dissolve the effects of another charm.--_n._
that which destroys the effects of another charm.--_v.t._ COUN'TER-CHECK,
to check by some obstacle: to rebuke.--_ns._ COUNTER-CHECK', a check in
opposition to another: a rebuke; COUNTER-CLAIM, kown't[.e]r-kl[=a]m, _n._ a
cross-demand brought forward as a partial or complete set-off against
another claim.; COUN'TER-CURR'ENT, a current flowing in an opposite
direction; COUN'TER-DRAIN, a drain alongside a canal, &c., to carry off
water oozing out.--_v.t._ COUN'TERDRAW, to trace on oiled paper or other
transparent material.--_ns._ COUN'TER-EV'IDENCE, evidence brought forward
in opposition to other evidence; COUN'TERFOIL, the corresponding part of a
bank cheque, &c., retained by the giver; COUN'TER-FORCE, an opposing force;
COUN'TER-FORT (_fort._), a buttress, or arch behind the revetments or
retaining walls of the ditches of permanent fortifications; COUN'TER-GAUGE,
an adjustable scribing gauge for marking the measurements of a mortise on a
piece to be tenoned; COUN'TER-GUARD (_fort._), an outwork consisting of two
lines of rampart running parallel to the faces of the bastion, to guard the
bastion from being breached; COUN'TER-IN'FLUENCE, an opposing influence;
COUN'TER-IRR'ITANT, an agent or substance applied to the skin so as to
redden, to vesicate, or to produce pustules, &c.; COUN'TER-IRRIT[=A]'TION,
an artificial irritation produced in one part of the body to act in
opposition to and remove already existing irritation; COUN'TERLIGHT
(_paint._), a light opposite to any object, disturbing the effect of its
light.--_v.i._ COUN'TERMARCH, to march back or in a direction contrary to a
former one.--_n._ a marching backward or in a direction different from a
former one: (_mil._) an evolution by which a body of men change front, and
still retain the same men in the front rank: change of measures.--_n._
COUN'TERMARK, an additional mark put on a bale of goods belonging to
several merchants, so that it may not be opened except in the presence of
all the owners: a mark put on standard metal by the London Goldsmiths'
Company in addition to the artificer's: an artificial cavity made in the
teeth of horses to disguise their age.--_v.t._ COUN'TERMINE, to make a mine
in opposition to: to oppose by means of a countermine: (_fig._) to
frustrate by secret working:--_pr.p._ countermin'ing; _pa.p._
countermined'.--_ns._ COUN'TER-MINE (_mil._), a mine or chamber excavated
by the besieged to counteract or destroy the mines made by the besiegers:
(_fig._) any means of counteraction; COUN'TER-M[=O]'TION, an opposite
motion; COUN'TER-MOVE, -MOVE'MENT, a contrary move, movement.--_v.t._
COUN'TERMURE, to fortify a wall with another wall.--_ns._
COUN'TER-[=O]'PENING, an aperture or vent on the opposite side, or in a
different place; COUN'TER-PACE, a step in opposition to another, a contrary
measure.--_adj._ COUN'TER-PALED (_her._), divided equally, as an
escutcheon, first palewise, then by a line fesswise, with two tinctures
countercharged.--_ns._ COUN'TER-PAROLE', a word in addition to the
password; COUN'TERPART, the part that answers to another part: that which
fits into or completes another, having the qualities which another lacks,
and so an opposite.--_adj._ COUN'TER-PASS'ANT (_her._), denoting two
animals in a coat of arms represented as passing each other the contrary
way.--_n._ COUN'TERPLEA, a replication to a plea or request.--_v.t._
COUNTERPLEAD', to plead the contrary of; COUN'TERPLOT', to plot against in
order to frustrate another plot:--_pr.p._ counterplot'ting; _pa.p._
counterplot'ted.--_n._ a plot or stratagem opposed to another plot.--_v.t._
COUN'TERPOISE, to poise or weigh against or on the opposite side: to act in
opposition to with equal effect.--_n._ an equally heavy weight in the other
scale--(_Spens._) COUN'TERPOYS.--_ns._ COUN'TER-POIS'ON, a poison used as
the antidote of another; COUN'TER-PRES'SURE, opposing pressure;
COUN'TER-PROOF, an inverted impression obtained from a newly printed proof
of an engraving, by laying it, while the ink is still wet, upon plain
paper, and passing it through the press; COUN'TER-REVOL[=U]'TION, a
subsequent revolution counteracting the effect of a previous;
COUN'TER-ROLL, a copy of the rolls relating to appeals, inquests, &c.,
serving as a check on another's roll; COUN'TER-ROUND, a body of officers
which goes to inspect the rounds.--_adj._ COUN'TERS[=A]'LIENT (_her._),
salient in opposite directions.--_n._ COUN'TERSCARP (_fort._), the side of
the ditch nearest to the besiegers and opposite to the scarp.--_v.t._
COUNTERSEAL' (_Shak._), to seal along with others.--_ns._
COUN'TER-SECUR'ITY, security given to one who has become surety for
another; COUN'TER-SENSE, an interpretation contrary to the real
sense.--_v.t._ COUNTERSIGN', to sign on the opposite side of a writing: to
sign in addition to the signature of a superior, to attest the authenticity
of a writing.--_ns._ COUN'TERSIGN, a military private sign or word, which
must be given in order to pass a sentry: a counter-signature;
COUN'TER-SIG'NAL, a signal used as an answer [Illustration] to another;
COUN'TER-SIG'NATURE, a name countersigned to a writing.--_v.t._
COUN'TERSINK, to bevel the edge of a hole, as for the head of a screw-nail
(_a_ _a_ in fig.)--it is usually done by a COUNTERSINK-BIT (_b_ in fig.) in
a brace.--_ns._ COUN'TER-STAND, opposition, resistance;
COUN'TER-STATE'MENT, a statement in opposition to another statement;
COUN'TER-STROKE (_Spens._), a stroke given in return for another stroke;
COUN'TER-TAL'LY, a tally serving as a check to another; COUN'TER-TEN'OR,
name applied to alto when sung by a male voice (so called because a
contrast to tenor); COUN'TER-TIME, the resistance of a horse that
interrupts his cadence and the measure of his manège: resistance,
opposition; COUN'TERTURN, a turn in a play different from what was
expected.--_v.t._ COUNTERVAIL', to be of avail against: to act against with
equal effect: to be of equal value to: to compensate [COUNTER and
AVAIL].--_n._ COUN'TER-VIEW, an opposing view: a posture in which two
persons face each other: opposition: contrast.--_v.t._ COUN'TER-VOTE, to
vote in opposition to; COUN'TER-WEIGH, to weigh against,
counterbalance.--_ns._ COUN'TER-WEIGHT, a weight in an opposite
scale.--_v.i._ COUN'TER-WHEEL, to wheel in an opposite direction.--_n._
COUN'TER-WORK, a work raised in opposition to another.--_v.t._ to work in
opposition to.--_p.adj._ COUN'TER-WROUGHT. [Fr.,--L. _contra_, against.]

COUNTER, kown't[.e]r, _n._ (_Spens._) encounter.--_v.t._ to encounter: to
contradict.

COUNTERFEIT, kown't[.e]r-fit, -f[=e]t, _v.t._ to imitate: to copy without
authority: to forge.--_n._ something false or copied, or that pretends to
be true and original.--_adj._ pretended: made in imitation of: forged:
false.--_n._ COUN'TERFEITER, one who counterfeits.--_adv._ COUN'TERFEITLY,
in a counterfeit manner: falsely.--_n._ COUN'TER-FES'ANCE (_Spens._), act
of counterfeiting: forgery. [O. Fr. _contrefet_, from _contrefaire_, to
imitate--L. _contra_, against, _fac[)e]re_, to do.]

COUNTERMAND, kown-t[.e]r-mand', _v.t._ to give a command in opposition to
one already given: to revoke.--_n._ a revocation of a former order.--_adj._
COUNTERMAND'ABLE. [O. Fr. _contremander_--L. _contra_, against, and
_mand[=a]re_, to order.]

COUNTERPANE, kown't[.e]r-p[=a]n, _n._ a coverlet for a bed, stitched or
woven in squares.--Older form COUN'TERPOINT. [A corr. of O. Fr.
_contrepointe_, which is a corr. of _coultepointe_--L. _culcita puncta_, a
stitched pillow or cover. See QUILT.]

COUNTERPOINT, kown't[.e]r-point, _n._ (_mus._) the art of combining
melodies: the setting of a harmony of one or more parts to a melody: the
art of composition.--_adj._ CONTRAPUNT'AL.--_n._ CONTRAPUNT'IST.
[Fr.,--_contre_, against, _point_, a point.]

COUNTRY, kun'tri, _n._ a rural region as distinct from a town: a tract of
land: the land in which one was born, or in which one resides.--_adj._
belonging to the country: rustic: rude.--_p.adj._ COUN'TRIFIED.--_v.t._
COUN'TRIFY, to make rustic.--_ns._ COUN'TRY-BOX, a country-house;
COUN'TRY-DANCE, a dance practised by country people: a dance in which an
indefinite number of couples can take part, the gentlemen being arranged at
the commencement on one side, and the ladies on the other.--_n.pl._
COUN'TRY-FOLK, the inhabitants of the country.--_ns._ COUN'TRY-HOUSE,
-SEAT, the residence of a country gentleman; COUN'TRYMAN, one who lives in
the country: a farmer: one born in the same country with another;
COUN'TRY-SIDE, a district or part of the country; COUN'TRY-WOMAN, a woman
who dwells in the country: a woman born in the same country.--COUNTRY
COUSIN, a relative from the country, unaccustomed to town sights or
manners; COUNTRY GENTLEMAN, a landed proprietor who resides on his estate
in the country; COUNTRY TOWN, a small town in a rural district, depending
on the agricultural industry of the surrounding country.--GO TO THE
COUNTRY, in parliamentary usage, to appeal to the feeling of the community
by a general election. [O. Fr., _contrée_--Low L. _contrata_, _contrada_,
an extension of L. _contra_, over against.]

COUNTY. See COUNT (1).

COUP, k[=oo], _n._ a blow, stroke, a successful hit: (_billiards_) the act
of putting a ball in a pocket without having hit another ball.--COUP
D'ÉTAT, a sudden or violent stroke of state policy, as that by which Louis
Napoleon subverted the constitution (Dec. 2, 1851); COUP DE GRÂCE, the
finishing blow by which a tortured man is put out of pain, any decisive
stroke generally; COUP DE MAIN, a sudden and overpowering attack; COUP DE
MAÎTRE, a master-stroke; COUP DE THÉÂTRE, a sudden and sensational turn in
a piece: COUP D'OEIL, a general view of a scene or subject taken in at a
glance. [Fr.,--L.,--_colaphos_, a blow.]

COUP, kowp, _v.t._ to exchange or barter.--_n._ COUP'ER, a dealer. [Scot.,
from Ice., _kaupa_, to buy.]

COUP, kowp, _v.t._ to overturn. [Scot.; perh. originally the same word as
COPE.]

COUPÉ, k[=oo]-p[=a], _n._ the front part of a French stagecoach: a
four-wheeled carriage seated for two inside, with a separate seat for the
driver: the front compartment of a railway carriage.--_adj._ COUPED
(_her._), cut evenly off, as the head or limb of an animal. [Fr. _couper_,
to cut.]

COUPEE, koo-p[=e]', _n._ in dancing, a salute to a partner, while resting
on one foot and swinging the other backward or forward. [Fr.,--_couper_, to
cut.]

COUPLE, kup'l, _n._ that which joins two things together: two of a kind
joined together, or connected: two: one pair at a dance: a pair: esp. of
married or betrothed persons: (_statics_) a pair of equal forces acting on
the same body in opposite and parallel directions.--_v.t._ to join
together.--_v.i._ to pair sexually.--_ns._ COUP'LEMENT, union: a couple;
COUP'LER, one who or that which couples or unites; COUP'LET, two lines of
verse that rhyme with each other; COUP'LING, that which connects, an
appliance for transmitting motion in machinery; COUP'LING-BOX, the box or
ring of metal connecting the contiguous ends of two lengths of shafts;
COUP'LING-PIN, a pin or bolt used in coupling machinery.--_adj._
WELL-COUPLED, of a horse, well formed at the part where the back joins the
rump. [O. Fr. _cople_--L. _copula_.]

COUPON, k[=oo]'pong, _n._ a billet, check, or other slip of paper cut off
from its counterpart: one of a series of tickets which are vouchers that
certain payments will be made or services be performed, at various times or
places, in consideration of money paid: a dividend or interest warrant
presented for payment by holders of debentures. [Fr.,--_couper_, to cut
off.]

COUPURE, koo-p[=u]r', _n._ an entrenchment made by the besieged behind a
breach: a passage cut to facilitate sallies. [Fr.,--_couper_, to cut.]

COURAGE, kur'[=a]j, _n._ the quality that enables men to meet dangers
without fear: bravery: spirit.--_interj._ take courage!--_adj._
COUR[=A]'GEOUS, full of courage: brave.--_adv._ COUR[=A]'GEOUSLY.--_n._
COUR[=A]'GEOUSNESS.--DUTCH COURAGE, a fictitious courage induced by
drinking; PLUCK UP ONE'S COURAGE, to nerve one's self to something daring;
THE COURAGE OF ONE'S CONVICTIONS, courage to act up to or consistently with
one's opinions. [O. Fr. _corage_ (Fr. _courage_), from L. _cor_, the
heart.]

COURANT, k[=oo]-ränt', _adj._ (_her._) in a running attitude.--_ns._
COURANTE', COURANT', an old dance with a kind of gliding step. [See
CURRENT.]

COURAP, koo-rap', _n._ an itching skin disease, common in India, with
eruptions on face, breast, groin, &c.

COURB, k[=oo]rb, _v.i._ (_Shak._) to bend, stoop to supplicate.--_adj._
(_Shak._) bent. [Fr.,--L. _curv[=a]re_, to bend.]

COURBARIL, koor'ba-ril, _n._ gum animé.

COURBETTE. Same as CURVET. [Fr.,--It. _corvetta_.]

COURE, obsolete form of COWER.

COURIER, k[=oo]'ri-[.e]r, _n._ a runner: a messenger: a state messenger: a
travelling attendant: a frequent title of newspapers. [Fr.,--L.
_curr[)e]re_, to run.]

COURSE, k[=o]rs, _n._ the act of running: the road or tract on which one
runs: the direction pursued: a voyage: a race: regular progress from point
to point: habitual method of procedure: a prescribed series, as of
lectures, &c.: each of the successive divisions of a meal, as dinner:
conduct: a range of bricks or stones on the same level in building:
(_naut._) one of the sails bent to a ship's lower yards, as the main-sail,
called the _main-course_, the fore-sail or _fore-course_, and the
cross-jack or _mizzen-course_: (_pl._) the menses.--_v.t._ to run, chase,
or hunt after.--_v.i._ to move with speed, as in a race or hunt.--_ns._
COURS'ER, a runner: a swift horse: one who courses or hunts; COURS'ING,
hunting with greyhounds; COURS'ING-JOINT, a joint between two courses of
masonry.--IN COURSE, in regular order: (_coll._) of course; OF COURSE, by
natural consequence, or by settled rule. [Fr. _cours_--L. _cursus_, from
_curr[)e]re_, _cursum_, to run.]

COURT, k[=o]rt, _n._ a space enclosed: a space surrounded by houses: the
palace of a sovereign: the body of persons who form his suite or council:
attention: civility, as 'to pay court:' (_law_) the hall of justice; the
judges and officials who preside there: any body of persons assembled to
decide causes, whether civil, military, or ecclesiastical.--_v.t._ to pay
attentions to: to woo: to solicit: to seek.--_ns._ COURT'-BAR'ON, the
assembly of freehold tenants of a manor under a lord; COURT'-CARD (see
COAT-CARD); COURT'-CUP'BOARD (_Shak._), a movable cupboard or sideboard on
which plate was displayed; COURT'-DAY, a day on which a judicial court
sits; COURT'-DRESS, the special regulation costume worn on state or
ceremonious occasions; COURT'-DRESS'ER, a flatterer.--_adj._ COURTEOUS
(kurt'yus), of court-like manners: polite: respectful: obliging.--_adv._
COURTEOUSLY (kurt'-).--_ns._ COURTEOUSNESS, (kurt'-); COURT'-FOOL, a fool
or jester, formerly kept at court for amusement; COURT'-GUIDE, a guide to,
or directory of, the names and residences of the nobility in a town;
COURT'-HAND, a modification of the Norman handwriting, as distinguished
from the modern or Italian handwriting, in use in the English law-courts
from the 16th century to the reign of George II.; COURT'-HOUSE, a building
where the law-courts are held; COURT'IER, one who frequents courts or
palaces: one who courts or flatters; COURT'IERISM, the behaviour or
practices of a courtier.--_adv._ COURT'IERLY.--_ns._ COURT'ING, paying
addresses to a woman, wooing; (_Spens._) attendance at court; COURT'-LEET,
a court of record held in a manor before the lord or his steward;
COURT'LET, a petty court.--_adj._ COURT'-LIKE, courtly: polite.--_ns._
COURT'LINESS; COURT'LING, a hanger-on at court.--_adj._ COURT'LY, having
manners like those at a court: elegant.--_ns._ COURT'-MAR'TIAL, a court
held by officers of the army or navy for the trial of offences against
military or naval laws:--_pl._ COURTS'-MAR'TIAL; one improvised in time of
war round an upturned drum for summary judgment is a DRUMHEAD
COURT-MARTIAL; COURT'-PLAS'TER, sticking-plaster made of silk, originally
applied as patches on the face by ladies at court; COURT'-ROLL, the record
of a court of justice; COURT'SHIP, courtly behaviour: the act of wooing
with intention to marry; COURT'-SWORD, a light dress-sword worn as part of
court-dress; COURT'YARD, a court or enclosed ground before a house.--COURT
HOLY WATER, empty compliments: (_obs._) flattery. [O. Fr. _cort_ (Fr.
_cour_)--Low L. _cortis_, a courtyard--L. _cors_, _cohors_, an enclosure;
akin to Gr. _chortos_, an enclosed place, L. _hortus_, a garden. See YARD.]

COURTESAN, -ZAN, k[=o]rt'e-zan, or kurt'e-zan, _n._ a court-mistress: a
woman of the town, a whore. [Fr.,--It. _cortigiana_.]

COURTESY, kort'e-si, or kurt'e-si, _n._ courtliness: elegance of manner: an
act of civility or respect: a curtsy: (_law_) the life interest which the
surviving husband has in the real or heritable estate of his wife.--_v.i._
to make a curtsy.--_pr.p._ court'esying; _pa.p._ court'esied.--_n.pl._
COURT'ESY-T[=I]'TLES, titles really invalid, but allowed by the usage of
society--as to children of peers. [O. Fr. _courtoisie_.]

COUSCOUS, kus'kus, _n._ an African dish of granulated flour steamed over
broth. [Ar. _kuskus_.]

COUSIN, kuz'n, _n._ formerly a kinsman generally; now, the son or daughter
of an uncle or aunt: a term used by a sovereign in addressing another, or
to one of his own noblemen: something kindred or related to another.--_ns._
COUS'IN-GER'MAN, a first cousin: something closely related; COUS'INHOOD,
COUS'INSHIP.--_adj._ COUS'INLY, like, or having the relation of, a
cousin.--_n._ COUS'INRY, cousins collectively.--FIRST COUSINS, children of
brothers and sisters--also called _Cousins-german_, _Full cousins_; FIRST
COUSIN ONCE REMOVED, the son or daughter of a cousin-german--sometimes
loosely called _Second cousin_; SECOND COUSINS, the children of first
cousins. [Fr.,--L. _consobrinus_--_con_, sig. connection, and _sobrinus_
for _sororinus_, applied to the children of sisters--_soror_, a sister.]

COUTEAU, koo-t[=o]', _n._ a large knife.--COUTEAU DE CHASSE, a
hunting-knife. [Fr.]

COUTER, k[=oo]'t[.e]r, _n._ (_slang_) a sovereign. [Said to be from Gipsy
_cuta_, a gold piece.]

COUTH, k[=oo]th (_Spens._), obsolete _pa.t._ of CAN. [See COULD.]

COUTHIE, k[=oo]th'i, _adj._ friendly, kindly. [Scot.]

COUVADE, k[=oo]-väd', _n._ a custom among savages in many parts of the
world for the father to take to his bed at the birth of a child, and submit
to certain restrictions of food, &c. [Erroneously attributed to the
Basques; the O. Fr. _couvade_, from _couver_, to hatch, never having had
this special meaning.]

COVE, k[=o]v, _n._ a small inlet of the sea: a bay: a cavern or rocky
recess: (_archit._) a concave arch or vault.--_v.t._ to overarch, and thus
form a hollow.--_adj._ COVED, formed with an arch.--_n._ COVE'LET, a small
cove. [A.S. _cófa_, a room; Ice. _kofi_, Ger. _koben_.]

COVE, k[=o]v, _n._ (_slang_) a fellow, a customer:--_fem._ COV'ESS--_dim._
COV'EY. [Prob. conn. with CHAP.]

COVEN, k[=o]v'en, _n._ a muster of witches.--_n._ COV'ENTREE, a point of
muster before a Scottish mansion.

COVENANT, kuv'e-nant, _n._ a mutual agreement: the writing containing the
agreement: an engagement entered into between God and a person or a
people--the _Old Covenant_, the Jewish dispensation; the _New Covenant_,
the new relation to God opened up by Jesus Christ.--_v.i._ to enter into an
agreement: to contract or bargain.--_n._ COV'ENANT-BREAK'ER, one who
violates a covenant.--_adj._ COV'ENANTED, holding a position under a
covenant or contract.--_ns._ COVENANTEE', the person to whom a covenant is
made; COV'ENANTER (usually in Scot. COVENANT'ER), one who signed or adhered
to the _Scottish National Covenant_ of 1638--the _Solemn League and
Covenant_ of 1643 was in effect an international treaty between Scotland
and England for securing civil and religious liberty; COV'ENANTOR, that
party to a covenant who subjects himself to the penalty of its
breach.--COVENANT OF GRACE, REDEMPTION, that by which life is freely
offered to sinners on condition of faith in Christ; COVENANT OF WORKS, that
made with Adam as federal representative of the human race on condition of
obedience. [O. Fr.,--L. _con_, together, and _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

COVENT, kov'ent, _n._ (_Shak._) a convent.

COVENTRY, kuv'ent-ri, _n._--in phrase, TO SEND TO COVENTRY = to shut a man
out of any special society.

COVER, kuv'[.e]r, _v.t._ to hide: to clothe: to extend over: to brood or
sit on: to be sufficient for: to protect: to table a coin of equal value in
wagering: to copulate with--esp. of a stallion: to screen: to aim directly
at.--_v.i._ to spread over so as to conceal something: to lay a table for a
meal: to put one's hat on.--_n._ that which protects: undergrowth, thicket,
concealing game, &c.: the table requisites for one person--plate, knife,
fork, napkin, &c.: deceitfulness: a swindler's confederate.--_adj._
COV'ERED, intended or used for shelter or concealment: roofed over: with
the hat on.--_ns._ COVER'ED-WAY; COV'ERT-WAY (_fort._), a path about thirty
feet wide outside the ditch of a fort, and so far sunk below the crest of
the glacis as to afford cover or shelter to the soldiers; COVER'ING,
anything that covers.--_adj._ COV'ERT, covered: concealed: secret.--_n._ a
place that covers or affords protection.--_ns._ COV'ERT-COAT, a short light
overcoat; COV'ERT-COAT'ING, cloth for such.--_adv._ COV'ERTLY, in a covered
or concealed manner.--_n._ COV'ERTURE, covering, shelter: (_law_) the
condition of a married woman as legally under the protection of her
husband.--COVER INTO, to transfer into; COVER SHORTS, to buy in such stocks
as have been sold short, in order to meet one's engagements, &c.; COVER THE
BUCKLE, to execute a difficult step in dancing. [Fr. _couvrir_ (It.
_coprire_)--L. _co-oper[=i]re_--_con_, and _oper[=i]re_, to cover.]

COVERLET, kuv'[.e]r-let, _n._ a bedcover.--Also COV'ERLID. [Fr.
_couvrelit_, _couvre_, _lit_--L. _lectum_, a bed.]

COVET, kuv'et, _v.t._ to desire or wish for eagerly: to wish for what is
unlawful.--_v.i._ to desire (with _for_).--_adjs._ COV'ETABLE;
COV'ETED.--_adv._ COV'ETINGLY.--_ns._ COV'ETISE (_obs._), covetousness:
ardent desire; COV'ETIVENESS (_obs._), acquisitiveness.--_adj._ COV'ETOUS,
inordinately desirous: avaricious.--_adv._ COV'ETOUSLY.--_n._
COV'ETOUSNESS. [O. Fr. _coveiter_ (Fr. _convoiter_)--L.
_cupiditat-em_--_cup[)e]re_, to desire.]

COVEY, kuv'i, _n._ a brood or hatch of partridges: a small flock of
birds--said of game: a party, a set. [O. Fr. _covée_--L. _cub[=a]re_, to
lie down.]

COVIN, kuv'in, _n._ a compact: a conspiracy.--_adjs._ COV'INOUS, COV'ENOUS,
deceitful. [O. Fr. _covin_--Late L. _convenium_--L. _convena_, a
meeting--_con_, together, _ven[=i]re_, to come.]

COVING, k[=o]'ving, _n._ the projection of upper stories over lower: the
vertical sides connecting the jambs with the breast of a fireplace. [See
COVE.]

COW, kow, _n._ the female of the bovine animals: the female of certain
other animals, as the elephant, &c.--older plurals, _Kine_ and _Kye_, the
latter now only Scotch.--_ns._ COW'-BANE, the water-hemlock, often
destructive to cattle; COW'-BERR'Y, the red whortleberry; COW'-BIRD,
-BUNT'ING, an American starling which accompanies cattle, and drops its
eggs into other birds' nests; COW'-BOY, a boy who has the care of cows:
(_U.S._) a man who has the charge of cattle on a ranch; COW'-CALF, a female
calf; COW'-CATCH'ER (_U.S._), an apparatus on the front of railway engines
to throw off obstacles; COW'-CHER'VIL, -PARS'LEY, -WEED, an umbelliferous
European plant of the hedges and woods; COW'FEEDER, a dairyman, cowherd;
COW'-GRASS, the zigzag clover: a variety of red clover; COW'-HEEL, an
ox-foot stewed to a jelly; COW'HERD, one who herds cows; COW'HIDE, the hide
of a cow: the hide of a cow made into leather: a coarse whip made of
twisted strips of cowhide.--_v.t._ to whip with a cowhide.--_n._
COW'-HOUSE, a place in which cows are stalled, a byre.--_adj._ COW'ISH,
like a cow: (_Shak._) cowardly.--_ns._ COW'-LEECH, a cow-doctor; COW'LICK,
a tuft of turned-up hair on the forehead; COW'-PARS'NIP, an umbelliferous
plant, used as food for hogs and cattle; COW'-PLANT, a perennial plant of
Ceylon, with a milky juice; COW'-POX, a disease which appears in pimples on
the teats of the cow, the matter thereof used for vaccination; COW'-TREE, a
South American tree that produces a nourishing fluid resembling milk;
COW'-WHEAT, a genus of annual plants, with yellow flowers and seeds
somewhat like grains of wheat. [A.S. _cú_, pl. _cý_; Ger. _kuh_; Sans.
_go_.]

COW, kow, _v.t._ to subdue: keep under: to dishearten.--_adjs._ COWED,
depressed; COW'ISH (_Shak._), easily cowed, timorous: mean. [Perh. from
Ice. _kúga_; Dan. _kue_, to subdue.]

COWAN, kow'an, _n._ (_Scot._) a mason who never served an apprenticeship:
one who tries to enter a mason's lodge, or the like, surreptitiously.

COWARD, kow'ard, _n._ a faint-hearted person: one without courage.--_v.t._
to intimidate.--_adjs._ COW'ARD, COW'ARDLY, afraid of danger: timid:
mean.--_ns._ COW'ARDICE, want of courage: timidity.--COW'ARDREE (_Spens._);
COW'ARDLINESS.--_adv._ COW'ARDLY.--_n._ COW'ARDSHIP (_Shak._), the quality
of being a coward. [O. Fr. _couard_ (It. _codardo_)--L. _cauda_, a tail.]

COWDIE-GUM, -PINE; COWRIE-PINE. See KAURI.

COWER, kow'er, _v.i._ to sink down through fear, &c.: to crouch, for
protection or in fear.--_adv._ COW'ERINGLY. [Cf. Ice. _kúra_, Dan. _kure_,
to lie quiet.]

COWHAGE, kow'[=a]j, _n._ the hairs of the pods of a tropical climbing plant
of the bean family, administered as a mechanical vermifuge, the pods
themselves or the plant. [Hind. _kaw[=a]nch_, _ko[=a]nch_.]

COWL, kowl, _n._ a cap or hood: a monk's hood: the badge of monkhood: a
monk: a cover for a chimney.--_v.t._ to make a monk of: to cover like a
cowl.--_adj._ COWLED, wearing a cowl. [A.S. _cufle_; Ice. _cofl_; akin to
L. _cucullus_, hood.]

COWL-STAFF, kowl'-staf, _n._ (_Shak._) a staff or pole on which a basket or
vessel is supported between two persons. [O. Fr. _cuvele_--L. _cupella_,
dim. of _cupa_, a cask, and staff.]

COWRIE, COWRY, kow'ri, _n._ a large genus of Gasteropods, including over a
hundred species, some of which are familiar as decorative objects, and as a
medium of exchange with uncivilised peoples. [Hindi _kaur[=i]_.]

COWSLIP, kow'slip, _n._ a beautiful and fragrant species of primrose,
common in English pastures.--_adj._ COW'SLIP'D, covered with cowslips.
[A.S. _cú_, cow, _slyppe_, perh. cow-dung.]

COXCOMB, koks'k[=o]m, _n._ a strip of red cloth notched like a cock's comb,
which professional fools used to wear: a fool: a fop.--_adjs._
COXCOM'BICAL, COXCOM'ICAL, foppish: vain.--_n._ COXCOMBICAL'ITY.--_adv._
COXCOM'BICALLY.--_n._ COX'COMBRY, the manner of a coxcomb. [COCKSCOMB.]

COXINESS, koks'i-nes, _n._ state of being cocksy, bumptiousness.

COXSWAIN, COCKSWAIN, kok'sw[=a]n, or kok'sn, _n._ a seaman who steers a
boat, and under the superior officer takes charge of it. [COCK, a boat, and
SWAIN.]

COY, koy, _adj._ modest: bashful: shy.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to caress:
(_Shak._) to disdain.--_adj._ COY'ISH, somewhat coy.--_adv._
COY'ISHLY.--_n._ COY'ISHNESS.--_adv._ COY'LY.--_n._ COY'NESS. [Fr.
_coi_--L. _quietus_, quiet.]

COYOTE, ko-y[=o]t'e, _n._ a prairie wolf, abundant in Mexico and Texas.
[Mex. _coyotl_.]

COYPU, koi'p[=oo], _n._ a large rodent in the porcupine section of the
order, common in South America--living in burrows near water, feeding on
aquatic plants. [Native name.]

COYSTREL, COYSTRIL. Same as COISTRIL.

COZ, kuz, _n._ a contraction of COUSIN.

COZE, k[=o]z, _n._ (_Jane Austen_) a cosy chat.

COZEN, kuz'n, _v.t._ to flatter: to cheat.--_ns._ COZ'ENAGE, the practice
of cheating: deceit; COZ'ENER. [Perh. from Fr. _cousiner_, to claim kindred
for one's own advantage, play the parasite--_cousin_, a cousin.]

COZIER, COSIER, k[=o]'zi-[.e]r, _n._ a cobbler. [O. Fr. _cousere_--L.
_consu[)e]re_, to sew together.]

COZY. See COSY.

CRAB, krab, _n._ a popular name applied to any of the short-tailed division
of decapod crustaceans: a sign in the zodiac: a portable winch: a
sour-tempered person: the lowest throw at hazard--two aces.--_adj._
CRABB'ED, ill-natured: harsh: rough: difficult, perplexing.--_adv._
CRABB'EDLY.--_n._ CRABB'EDNESS.--_adj._ CRAB'-FACED, having a sour, peevish
countenance.--_n._ CRAB'ITE, a fossil crab or crayfish.--_adj._ CRAB'-LIKE,
moving like a crab.--_n._ CRAB'-LOUSE, a crab-shaped louse infesting the
hair of the pubis, &c.--_n.pl._ CRAB'S'-EYES, the scarlet seeds of an East
Indian bead-tree: a concretion of carbonate of lime in the stomach of the
cray-fish.--_v.i._ CRAB'-S[=I]'DLE, to go sideways like a crab.--_n.pl._
CRAB'-YAWS, a name applied to the tumours of framboesia on the soles and
palms.--CATCH A CRAB, in rowing, to sink the oar too deeply in the water:
to miss the water altogether in making the stroke. [A.S. _crabba_; Ger.
_krabbe_.]

CRAB, krab, CRAB-APPLE, krab'-ap-l, _n._ a wild bitter apple.--_ns._
CRAB'-STICK, a stick made out of the crab-tree; CRAB'-TREE, the tree that
bears crab-apples.--_adj._ like a crab-tree, crooked. [Perh. conn. with
CRABBED.]

CRAB-OIL, CRAB-WOOD. See CARAPA.

CRABRO, kr[=a]'br[=o], _n._ the typical genus of _Crabronidæ_, a family of
fossorial hymenopters: a hornet. [L.]

CRACK, krak, _v.i._ to utter a sharp sudden sound: to split: to boast: to
chat.--_v.t._ to produce a sudden noise: to break into chinks: to split: to
break partially or wholly: to open (a bottle).--_n._ a sudden sharp
splitting sound: a chink: a flaw: a blow, a smack: friendly chat: (_slang_)
housebreaking: a craze: one who has a craze: a pert boy.--_adj._ (_coll._)
excellent.--_n._ CRACK'-BRAIN, a crazy person.--_adjs._ CRACK'-BRAINED;
CRACKED, rent: damaged: crazy.--_ns._ CRACK'ER, one who or that which
cracks: a boaster, a lie: the pin-tail duck: (_U.S._) a thin crisp biscuit:
a bonbon, or a small firework, exploding when pulled asunder: (_U.S._) a
poor white; CRACK'-HALT'ER, CRACK'-HEMP (_Shak._), CRACK'-ROPE, one likely
to be hanged.--_adj._ CRACK'-JAW, of a word, hard to pronounce.--_ns._
CRACKS'MAN, a burglar; CRACK'-TRYST, one who breaks an engagement.--CRACK
CREDIT, to destroy one's credit; CRACK TRYST, to break an engagement; CRACK
UP, to praise. [A.S. _cracian_, to crack; cf. Dut. _kraken_, Gael. _crac_.]

CRACK, krak, _n._ (_Scot._) a moment, an instant.

CRACKLE, krak'l, _v.i._ to give out slight but frequent cracks.--_n._ the
giving out of slight cracks.--_ns._ CRACK'LIN, a kind of china-ware,
purposely cracked in the kiln as an ornament; CRACK'LING, the rind of roast
pork: (_pl._) skinny parts of suet without tallow: three stripes of velvet
worn on the sleeves of students at St John's College, Cambridge.--_adj._
CRACK'LY, brittle.--_n._ CRACK'NEL, a light, brittle biscuit: (_pl._)
pieces of fat pork fried crisp.

CRACOVIAN, kra-k[=o]'vi-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Cracow_.--_ns._
CRACOVIENNE', a graceful Polish dance, resembling the mazourka: the music
for such; CRAC'OWE, a long-toed boot fashionable under Richard II.

CRADLE, kr[=a]'dl, _n._ a bed or crib in which children are rocked:
(_fig._) infancy: the place where one is born and brought up: a frame in
which anything is imbedded: a case for a broken limb: a frame under a ship
for launching it: a box on rockers for washing auriferous dirt.--_v.t._ to
lay or rock in a cradle: to nurture.--_adj._ CR[=A]'DLED, laid in a
cradle.--_ns._ CR[=A]'DLE-SCYTHE, a broad scythe used in a cradle for
cutting grain; CR[=A]'DLE-WALK, an avenue arched over with trees;
CR[=A]'DLING.--FROM THE CRADLE, from birth, from the first. [A.S. _cradol_;
ety. obscure.]

CRAFT, kraft, _n._ cunning: artifice: dexterity: art: trade: occupation:
small ships.--_v.i._ to exercise one's craft (_Shak._, _Cor._, IV. vi.
118).--_adv._ CRAFT'ILY.--_n._ CRAFT'INESS.--_adj._ CRAFT'LESS, free from
craft.--_ns._ CRAFTS'MAN, one engaged in a craft; CRAFTS'MANSHIP,
CRAFT'MANSHIP; CRAFTS'MASTER, one skilled in a craft.--_adj._ CRAFT'Y,
having skill: cunning: deceitful. [A.S. _cræft_; Ger. _kraft_, power.]

CRAG, krag, _n._ a rough steep rock or point: (_geol._) a bed of gravel
mixed with shells.--_adjs._ CRAG'GED, CRAG'GY, full of crags or broken
rocks: rough: rugged.--_ns._ CRAG'GEDNESS, CRAG'GINESS; CRAGS'MAN, one
skilled in climbing rocks. [W. _craig_, a rock, _car-eg_, a stone; Gael.
_creag_, _carraig_.]

CRAG, CRAGGE, krag, _n._ the neck.--Scotch forms, CRAIG, CRAIG'IE. [Cf.
Dut. _kraag_, Ger. _kragen_, the neck.]

CRAKE, kr[=a]k, _v.i._ to utter a cry like a crow, &c.--_n._ CRAKE'-BERR'Y,
the crow-berry.

CRAKE, kr[=a]k, _n._ a crow, raven, corncrake: (_obs._) a boast. [See
CORNCRAKE.]

CRAM, kram, _v.t._ to press close: to stuff: to fill to superfluity:
(_slang_) to make believe false or exaggerated tales: to teach for a
special examination, only giving instruction useful for passing that
examination.--_v.i._ to eat greedily: to get up a subject by cram:--_pr.p._
cram'ming; _pa.p._ crammed.--_n._ a crush: (_slang_) a lie: information
that has been crammed: the system of cramming.--_adjs._ CRAM'-FULL;
CRAM'MABLE; CRAMMED.--_n._ CRAM'MER, one who prepares students for
examination by cramming them. [A.S. _crammian_; Ice. _kremja_, to squeeze;
Dan. _kramme_, to crumple.]

CRAMBO, kram'bo, _n._ a game in which one gives a word to which another
finds a rhyme: rime.--_ns._ CRAM'BOCLINK, -JINGLE, riming. [Prob. from L.
_crambe repetita_, cabbage served up again.]

CRAMBUS, kram'bus, _n._ a genus of pyralid moths, the veneers or
grass-moths--family _Crambidæ_, subfamily _Crambinæ_. [Gr. _krambos_, dry.]

CRAME, kr[=a]m, _n._ (_Scot._) a booth for selling goods.

CRAMOISY, kram'oiz-i, CRAMESY, kram'ez-i, _adj._ and _n._ crimson. [See
CRIMSON.]

CRAMP, kramp, _n._ an involuntary and painful contraction of a voluntary
muscle or group of muscles: restraint: a piece of iron bent at the ends,
for holding together wood, stone, &c.: a tool used by carpenters and
others, having a movable part which can be screwed tight so as to press
things together.--_adj._ hard to make out (used of handwriting): cramped:
narrow.--_v.t._ to affect with spasms: to confine: to hinder: to fasten
with a cramp-iron.--_ns._ CRAMP'BARK, the popular American name of the
medicinal _Viburnum Oxycoccus_; CRAMP'-BONE, the patella of the sheep, an
old charm for cramp; CRAMP'-FISH, the electric ray or torpedo;
CRAMP'-[=I]'RON, a piece of metal bent at both ends for binding things
together; CRAMP'ON, a grappling-iron: a pointed plate for the foot in
hill-climbing; CRAMP'-RING, a ring formerly blessed by the sovereign on
Good-Friday against cramp and the falling sickness.--_adj._ CRAMP'Y,
affected or diseased with cramp: producing cramp.--BATHER'S CRAMP, the
popular name for paralysis attacking a person while bathing; WRITER'S
CRAMP, or _Scrivener's palsy_, a common disease affecting those in the
habit of constant writing, the muscles refusing to obey only on attempting
to write. [O. Fr. _crampe_; cf. Dut. _kramp_, Ger. _krampf_.]

CRAN, kran, _n._ a measure of capacity in Scotland for herrings when just
taken out of the net. It amounts to 37½ imperial gallons, and comprises
about 750 herrings on an average.--COUP THE CRAN (_Scot._), to be upset.
[Prob. from Gael. _crann_, a measure.]

CRANBERRY, kran'ber-i, _n._ a genus of small evergreen shrubs growing in
peaty bogs and marshy grounds: the berry much used for tarts. [For
_crane-berry_; a late word; origin obscure; cf. Ger. _kranbeere_ or
_kranich-beere_.]

CRANCH. Same as CRAUNCH.

CRANE, kr[=a]n, _n._ a large wading bird, with long legs, neck, and bill: a
bent pipe for drawing liquor out of a cask: a machine for raising heavy
weights--both named from their likeness to the bird.--_v.t._ to raise with
a crane.--_v.i._ to stretch out the neck: to pull up before a jump.--_ns._
CRAN'AGE, the use of a crane: the price paid for the use of it; CRANE'-FLY,
a genus of dipterous insects, nearly allied to the gnats, with very long
legs.--_adj._ CRANE'-NECKED.--_n._ CRANE'S'-BILL, the Geranium, from a
lengthened appendage of the seed-vessel. [A.S. _cran_; Ger. _kranich_, W.
_garan_.]

CRANE. Same as CRANIUM.

CRANIUM, kr[=a]'ni-um, _n._ the skull: the bones enclosing the
brain.--_adj._ CR[=A]'NIAL, pertaining to the cranium.--_n._ CRANIOG'NOMY,
cranial physiognomy.--_adj._ CRANIOLOG'ICAL.--_ns._ CRANIOL'OGIST, one
skilled in craniology; CRANIOL'OGY, the study of skulls: phrenology;
CRANIOM'ETER, an instrument for measuring the skull; CRANIOM'ETRY, the
measurement of skulls; CRANINOS'COPIST, a phrenologist; CRANIOS'COPY,
phrenology; CRANIOT'OMY (_obstetrics_), the act of breaking down the head
of the foetus. [Low L. _cranium_--Gr. _kranion_, from _kar[=e]_, the head.]

CRANK, krangk, _n._ a crook or bend: a conceit in speech: a whim: (_mach._)
a lever or arm on a shaft, driven by hand or by a connecting-rod, its
object being to convert reciprocating motion into rotary motion.--_v.i._ to
move in a zizag manner.--_v.t._ to shape like a crank: to provide with a
crank.--_adj._ crooked: crabbed: loose or slack.--_adv._ CRANK'ILY.--_n._
CRANK'INESS.--_adj._ CRANK'Y, crooked: infirm: full of whims: cross. [M. E.
_kranke_--A.S. _crincan_, to yield; cf. Ger. _krank_.]

CRANK, krangk, _adj._ brisk: merry. [Origin unknown.]

CRANK, krangk, CRANK-SIDED, krangk-s[=i]'ded, _adj._ (_naut._) liable to be
upset--_n._ CRANK'NESS, liability to be upset. [Ety. uncertain.]

CRANKLE, krangk'l, CRINKLE, kringk'l, _n._ a turn, winding, or wrinkle, an
angular protuberance.--_v.t._ to bend: to twist.

CRANNOG, kran'og, _n._ the name given in Scotland and Ireland to a
fortified island (partly natural and partly artificial) in a lake, once
used as a dwelling-place and place of refuge. [Gael. _crann_, a tree.]

CRANNY, kran'i, _n._ a rent: a chink: a secret place.--_v.i._ to enter
crannies.--_adj._ CRANN'IED, having crannies, rents, or fissures. [Fr.
_cran_, a notch.]

CRANREUCH, kran'ruh, _n._ (_Scot._) hoar-frost. [Gael.]

CRANTS, krantz, _n._ (_Shak._) the garland carried before the bier of a
maiden and hung over her grave. [From Ger. _kranz_, a wreath, a garland.]

CRAPE, kr[=a]p, _n._ a thin silk fabric, tightly twisted, without removing
the natural gum--usually dyed black, used for mournings.--_adj._ made of
crape.--_v.t._ to clothe with crape: to frizzle (hair).--_adj._ CRAP'Y. [O.
Fr. _crespe_ (Fr. _crêpe_)--L. _crispus_, crisp.]

CRAPPIT-HEAD, krap'it-hed, _n._ a haddock's head stuffed with a compound of
oatmeal, suet, onions, and pepper. [_Crappit_, from a Scotch word, _crap_,
to cram.]

CRAPULENCE, krap'[=u]-lens, _n._ sickness caused by an overdose of
drink.--_adjs._ CRAP'ULOUS, CRAP'ULENT. [Fr. _crapule_--L. _crapula_,
intoxication.]

CRARE, CRAYER, kr[=a]r, _n._ a trading vessel. [O. Fr. _craier_--Late L.
_craiera_; origin dub.]

CRASE. Obsolete form of CRAZE.

CRASH, krash, _n._ a noise as of things breaking or being crushed by
falling; the shock of two bodies meeting: the failure of a commercial
undertaking.--_v.i._ to fall to pieces with a loud noise: to move with such
a noise.--_v.t._ to dash in pieces. [From the sound.]

CRASH, krash, _n._ a coarse strong linen.

CRASIS, kr[=a]'sis, _n._ the mixture of different elements in the
constitution of the body: temperament: (_gram._) the mingling or
contraction of two vowels into one long vowel, or into a diphthong. [Gr.
_krasis_--_kerannynai_, to mix.]

CRASS, kras, _adj._ gross: thick: dense: stupid.--_ns._ CRASSAMENT'UM, the
thick part of coagulated blood: the clot; CRASS'ITUDE, coarseness: density:
stupidity.--_adv._ CRASS'LY.--_n._ CRASS'NESS.--_n.pl._ CRASSUL[=A]'CEÆ, an
order of herbaceous or shrubby, succulent plants--including the
_Stone-crop_ and _House-leek_. [O. Fr. _cras_--L. _crassus_.]

CRATÆGUS, kra-t[=e]'gus, _n._ a genus of thorny shrubs, of the rose family,
in north temperate regions. [Gr.]

CRATCH, krach, _n._ a crib to hold hay for cattle, a manger.--_n.pl._
CRATCHES, a swelling on a horse's pastern, under the fetlock. [Fr.
_crèche_, a manger; from a Teut. root, whence also crib.]

CRATE, kr[=a]t, _n._ a wicker-work case for packing crockery in, or for
carrying fruit. [L. _cratis_, a hurdle. See CRADLE.]

CRATER, kr[=a]t'[.e]r, _n._ the bowl-shaped mouth of a volcano.--_adjs._
CRAT'ERIFORM, or CRATER'IFORM, shaped like a crater; CRAT'EROUS. [L.,--Gr.
_krat[=e]r_, a large bowl for mixing wine, from _kerannynai_, to mix.]

CRAUNCH, kranch. A form of CRUNCH.

CRAVAT, kra-vat', _n._ a kind of neckcloth worn chiefly by men.--_v.t._ to
dress in a cravat.--_adj._ CRAVAT'TED, wearing a cravat. [Fr.
_cravate_--introduced in 1636 from the _Cravates_ or Croatians.]

CRAVE, kr[=a]v, _v.t._ to beg earnestly: to beseech: to demand or require:
to long for.--_ns._ CRAV'ER, one who craves: a beggar; CRAV'ING, desire:
longing. [A.S. _crafian_, to crave; Ice. _krefja_.]

CRAVEN, kr[=a]v'n, _n._ a coward: a spiritless fellow.--_adj._ cowardly:
spiritless.--_v.t._ to render spiritless.--_adv._ CRAV'ENLY.--_n._
CRAV'ENNESS.--TO CRY CRAVEN, to surrender. [M. E. _cravant_--O. Fr.
participle _cravanté_, corresponding to L. _crepant-em_, _crep[=a]re_, to
rattle, to break; some explain M. E. _cravant_ as O. Fr. _creant_, as in
_recreant_.]

CRAW, kraw, _n._ the crop, throat, or first stomach of fowls: the stomach
of animals generally. [M. E. _crawe_; not found in A.S.; cf. Dut. _kraag_,
neck.]

CRAWFISH. See CRAYFISH.

CRAWL, krawl, _v.i._ to move slowly along the ground, as a worm: to creep:
to move feebly, stealthily, or sneakingly: to be covered with crawling
things.--_n._ the act of crawling.--_ns._ CRAWL'ER, one who or that which
crawls: a reptile; CRAWL'ING.--_adv._ CRAWL'Y (_coll._), with a creepy
feeling. [Scand.; Ice. _krafla_, Dan. _kravle_; Ger. _krabbeln_, to creep.]

CRAWL, krawl, _n._ a pen for keeping fish: a kraal.

CRAX, kraks, _n._ the typical genus of birds of family _Cracidæ_.

CRAYFISH, kr[=a]'fish, CRAWFISH, kraw'fish, _n._ a large fresh-water
crustacean in the long-tailed division of the order _Decapoda_: the small
spiny lobster. [M. E. _crevice_--O. Fr. _crevice_ (Fr. _écrevisse_, a
crayfish)--Old High Ger. _krebiz_, a CRAB.]

CRAYON, kr[=a]'on, _n._ a pencil made of chalk or pipeclay, variously
coloured, used for drawing: a drawing done with crayons.--_v.t._ to draw
with a crayon.--IN CRAYONS, of a picture, made by crayons. [Fr.
_crayon_--_craie_, chalk, from L. _creta_, chalk.]

CRAZE, kr[=a]z, _v.t._ to weaken: to derange (applied to the intellect):
(_obs._) to break.--_v.i._ to become mad.--_n._ a crack or flaw:
insanity.--_adj._ CRAZED, deranged.--_adv._ CRAZ'ILY.--_ns._ CRAZ'INESS;
CRAZ'ING-MILL, a mill for crushing tin-ore.--_adj._ CRAZ'Y, frail: insane:
demented. [Scand.; Sw. _krasa_, Dan. _krase_, to crackle; whence also Fr.
_écraser_, to crush.]

CREAGH, CREACH, kreh, _n._ a foray, raid: booty. [Gael.]

CREAK, kr[=e]k, _v.i._ to make a sharp, grating sound, as of a hinge,
&c.--_n._ a grating noise, as of an unoiled hinge.--_adv._
CREAK'ILY.--_adj._ CREAK'Y. [From the sound, like _crake_ and _croak_.]

CREAM, kr[=e]m, _n._ the oily substance which forms on milk, yielding
butter when churned: the best part of anything: any cream-like preparation,
as _cold cream_ for the skin, &c., or any dish largely made of cream, or
like cream, as _chocolate-cream_, _ice-cream_, _whipped-cream_, &c.--_v.t._
to take off the cream.--_v.i._ to gather or form cream.--_ns._ CREAM'-CAKE,
a kind of cake filled with custard made of cream, &c.; CREAM'-CHEESE,
cheese made of cream.--_adj._ CREAM'-COL'OURED, of the colour of cream,
light yellow.--_n._ CREAM'ERY, an establishment where butter and cheese are
made from the milk supplied by a number of producers: a shop for milk,
butter, &c.--_adj._ CREAM'-FACED, pale-faced.--_ns._ CREAM'-FRUIT, the
fruit of a creeping West African plant of the dogbane family, yielding a
cream-like juice; CREAM'INESS.--_adj._ CREAM'-LAID, of a cream-colour and
laid, or bearing linear water-lines as if laid.--_ns._ CREAM'-NUT, the
Brazil nut; CREAM'-SLICE, a wooden blade for skimming cream from
milk.--_adjs._ CREAM'-WOVE, woven of a cream-colour; CREAM'Y, full of or
like cream: gathering like cream.--CREAM OF TARTAR, a white crystalline
compound made by purifying argol, bitartrate of potash. [O. Fr. _cresme_,
_creme_--L. _chrisma_.]

CREANCE, kr[=e]'ans, _n._ the cord which secures the hawk while being
trained. [Fr.]

CREANT, kr[=e]'ant, _adj._ creating: formative.

CREASE, kr[=e]s, _n._ a mark made by folding or doubling anything:
(_cricket_) a line indicating the boundaries of a particular space, as the
position of a batter and bowler.--_v.t._ to make creases in
anything.--_v.i._ to become creased.--_adj._ CREAS'Y, full of creases.
[Prob. Celt., as Bret. _kr[=i]z_, &c.]

CREASE. See CREESE.

CREASOTE. See CREOSOTE.

CREATE, kr[=e]-[=a]t', _v.t._ to bring into being or form out of nothing:
to beget: to form: to invest with a new form, office, or character: to
produce.--_adj._ CRE[=A]T'ABLE.--_n._ CRE[=A]'TION, the act of creating,
esp. the universe: that which is created, the world, the universe.--_adj._
CRE[=A]'TIONAL.--_ns._ CRE[=A]'TIONISM, the theory of special creation,
opp. to _Evolutionism_: the theory that God immediately creates a soul for
every human being born--opp. to _Traducianism_; CRE[=A]'TIONIST.--_adj._
CRE[=A]'TIVE, having power to create: that creates.--_adv._
CRE[=A]'TIVELY.--_ns._ CRE[=A]'TIVENESS; CRE[=A]'TOR, he who creates: a
maker:--_fem._ CRE[=A]'TRIX, CRE[=A]'TRESS; CRE[=A]'TORSHIP.--_adjs._
CREA'TURAL, CREA'TURELY, pertaining to a creature or thing created.--_ns._
CREATURE (kr[=e]'t[=u]r), whatever has been created, animate or inanimate,
esp. every animated being, an animal, a man: a term of contempt or of
endearment: a dependent, instrument, or puppet; CREA'TURESHIP.--THE
CREATOR, the Supreme Being, God.--CREATURE COMFORTS, material comforts,
food, &c.: liquor, esp. whisky. [L. _cre[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_; Gr.
_krain-ein_, to fulfil.]

CREATINE, kr[=e]'a-tin, _n._ a constant and characteristic constituent of
the striped muscle of vertebrates--also KRE'ATINE.--_adj._ CREAT'IC,
relating to flesh.--_n._ CRE'ATININE, dehydrated form, a constant
constituent of urine, found also in fish muscles. [Gr. _kreas_, _kreatos_,
flesh.]

CRÈCHE, kresh, _n._ a sort of public nursery for children, while their
mothers are at work. [Fr.]

CREDENCE, kr[=e]'dens, _n._ belief: trust: the small table beside the altar
on which the bread and wine are placed before being consecrated.--_n._
CREDEN'DUM, a thing to be believed, an act of faith:--_pl._
CREDENDA.--_adjs._ CR[=E]'DENT, easy of belief; CREDEN'TIAL, giving a title
to belief or credit.--_n._ that which entitles to credit or confidence:
(_pl._) esp. the letters by which one claims confidence or authority among
strangers.--_ns._ CREDIBIL'ITY, CRED'IBLENESS.--_adj._ CREDIBLE (kred'-),
that may be believed.--_adv._ CRED'IBLY.--_n._ CRED'IT, belief: esteem:
reputation: honour: good character: sale on trust: time allowed for
payment: the side of an account on which payments received are entered: a
sum placed at a person's disposal in a bank on which he may draw to its
amount.--_v.t._ to believe: to trust: to sell or lend to on trust: to enter
on the credit side of an account: to set to the credit of.--_adj._
CRED'ITABLE, trustworthy: bringing credit or honour.--_n._
CRED'ITABLENESS.--_adv._ CRED'ITABLY.--_ns._ CRED'ITOR, one to whom a debt
is due:--_fem._ CRED'ITRIX; CR[=E]'DO, the Creed, or a musical setting of
it for church services; CRED[=U]'LITY, credulousness: disposition to
believe on insufficient evidence.--_adj._ CRED'ULOUS, easy of belief: apt
to believe without sufficient evidence: unsuspecting.--_adv._
CRED'ULOUSLY.--_ns._ CRED'ULOUSNESS; CREED, a summary of articles of
religious belief, esp. those called the Apostles', Nicene, and Athanasian:
any system of belief. [Fr.,--Low L. _credentia_--L. _credent-_, believing,
pr.p. of _cred[)e]re_.]

CREEK, kr[=e]k, _n._ a small inlet or bay of the sea, or the tidal estuary
of a river: any turn or winding: in America and Australia, a small
river.--_adj._ CREEK'Y, full of creeks: winding. [Prob. Scand., Ice.
_kriki_, a nook; cf. Dut. _kreek_, a bay.]

CREEL, kr[=e]l, _n._ a basket, esp. an angler's basket. [Prob. Celt; cf.
Old Ir. _criol_, a chest.]

CREEP, kr[=e]p, _v.i._ to move on the belly, like a snake: to move slowly:
to grow along the ground or on supports, as a vine: to fawn or cringe: to
have the physical sensation of something creeping over or under the skin:
to shudder at from fear or repugnance: to drag with a creeper, as a
river-bottom:--_pr.p._ creep'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ crept.--_ns._
CREEP'ER, a creeping plant: a genus of small climbing birds; CREEP'-HOLE, a
hole into which to creep: a subterfuge; CREEP'IE, a low stool, the old
Scotch stool of repentance.--_adv._ CREEP'INGLY.--_adj._ CREEP'Y. [A.S.
_creópan_; Dut. _kruipen_.]

CREESE, CREASE, kr[=e]s, _n._ a Malay dagger with a wavy blade--also
KRIS.--_v.t._ to stab with a creese.

CREESH, kr[=e]sh, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to grease.--_n._ grease.--_adj._
CREESH'Y. [O. Fr. _craisse_--L. _crassus_, fat.]

CREMAILLERE, kre-mal-y[=a]r', _n._ a line of fortification built zigzag to
give wider range in firing. [Fr.]

CREMATION, krem-[=a]'shun, _n._ act of burning, esp. of the dead.--_v.t._
CREMATE'.--_ns._ CREM[=A]'TIONIST, one who advocates cremation; CREMAT'OR,
CREMAT[=O]R'IUM, CREM'ATORY, a place where cremation is done.--_adj._
CREMAT[=O]R'IAL. [L.,--_crem[=a]re_, to burn.]

CREMONA, krem-[=o]'na, _n._ a superior kind of violin made at _Cremona_ in
Italy.--_adj._ CREMONESE'.

CREMOR, kr[=e]'mor, _n._ thick juice.

CREMOSIN, krem'[=o]-zin, _n._ crimson (_Spens._).

CRENATE, -D, kr[=e]'n[=a]t, -ed, _adj._ (_bot._) having the edge
notched.--_ns._ CR[=E]'NA, a furrow or notch; CREN[=A]'TION;
CREN'ATURE.--_adjs._ CREN'ULATE, -D, finely notched or crenate. [L.
_crena_, a notch.]

CRENEL, kren'el, CRENELLE, kre-nel', _n._ (_archit._) an opening in a
parapet for shooting through: a battlement--dim. CREN'ELET.--_n._ CRENAUX
(kr[=e]'n[=o]), crenellations or loopholes in a fortress.--_v.t._
CREN'ELLATE.--_adjs._ CRENELL[=A]T'ED, furnished with battlements:
indented.--_n._ CRENELL[=A]'TION.--_adjs._ CRENELLE' (_her._), embattled;
CRENELLED', having embrasures. [Fr.,--Low L. _crena_, a notch.]

CREOLE, kr[=e]'[=o]l, _n._ and _adj._ strictly applied in the former
Spanish, French, and Portuguese colonies of America, Africa, and the East
Indies to natives of pure European blood (_sangre azul_), in opposition to
immigrants themselves born in Europe, or to the offspring of mixed blood,
as mulattoes, quadroons, Eurasians, &c.: (_U.S._) applied only to the
native French stock in Louisiana: a negro born in the West Indies--earlier
CRE[=O]'LIAN. [Fr. _créole_--Sp. _criollo_, contr. of _criadillo_, 'a
little nursling,' dim. of _criado_--_criar_, lit. to create, also to bring
up, to nurse--L. _cre[=a]re_.]

CREOPHAGOUS, kr[=e]-of'a-gus, _adj._ flesh-eating. [Gr. _kreas_, flesh,
_phagein_, to eat.]

CREOSOTE, kr[=e]'o-s[=o]t, CREASOTE, kr[=e]'a-s[=o]t, _n._ an oily,
colourless liquid obtained from the tar produced by the destructive
distillation of wood. [Gr. _kreas_, flesh, _s[=o]t[=e]r_,
saviour--_s[=o]z-ein_, to save.]

CREPANCE, kr[=e]'pans, _n._ a wound on a horse's hind ankle-joint, caused
by striking with the shoe of the other hind-foot.--Also CR[=E]'PANE. [L.
_crep[=a]re_, to break.]

CRÊPE, kr[=a]p, _v.t._ to frizz, as hair. [See CRAPE.]

CREPITATE, krep'i-t[=a]t, _v.i._ to crackle, snap.--_adj._ CREP'ITANT,
crackling.--_n._ CREPIT[=A]'TION, the characteristic sound detected in the
lungs by auscultation.--_adj._ CREP'IT[=A]TIVE.--_n._ CREP'ITUS. [L.
_crepit[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, freq. of _crep[=a]re_, to crack, rattle.]

CREPON, krep'on, _n._ a woollen or silk crapy stuff. [Fr.]

CREPT, krept, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of CREEP.

CREPUSCULAR, kre-pus'k[=u]-lar, _adj._ of or pertaining to twilight--also
CREPUS'CULOUS.--_ns._ CREPUS'CULE, CREPUS'CLE, twilight. [L.
_crepusculum_--_creper_, dusky, obscure.]

CRESCENDO, kres-en'd[=o], _adv._ (_mus._) gradually increasing in force or
loudness.--_n._ a passage marked by this.--Often _cres._, _cresc._, or
[Crescendo symbol].

CRESCENT, kres'ent, _adj._ increasing: shaped like the new or old
moon.--_n._ the moon as she increases towards half-moon: a figure like the
crescent moon, as that on the Turkish standard: the standard itself: the
Turkish power: a range of buildings in curved form.--_n._ CRES'CENTADE, a
religious war for Islam.--_adjs._ CRES'CENTED, CRESCENT'IC, formed like a
crescent; CRES'CIVE (_Shak._), increasing. [L. _crescens_, _crescent-is_,
pr.p. of _cresc[)e]re_, to grow.]

CRESS, kres, _n._ the name of several species of plants like the
water-cress, which grow in moist places, and have pungent leaves used as
salads and medicinally.--_adj._ CRESS'Y, abounding in cresses. [A.S.
_cresse_, _cerse_; cf. Dut. _kers_, Ger. _kresse_.]

CRESSET, kres'et, _n._ an iron basket, jar, or open lamp filled with
combustible material, placed on a beacon, lighthouse, wharf, &c.: a torch
generally. [O. Fr. _cresset_, _crasset_ (Fr. _creuset_)--Old Dut.
_kruysel_, a hanging lamp.]

CREST, krest, _n._ the comb or tuft on the head of a cock and other birds:
the summit of anything, as a roof-ridge, hill, wave: the mane of a horse,
&c.: (_anat._) a ridge along the surface of a bone: a plume of feathers or
other ornament on the top of a helmet: (_her._) an accessory figure
originally surmounting the helmet, placed on a wreath, &c., also used
separately as a personal cognisance on plate, &c.--_v.t._ to furnish with,
or serve for, a crest, to surmount.--_p.adj._ CREST'ED, having a crest:
(_bot._) having an elevated appendage like a crest.--_adjs._ CREST'FALLEN,
dejected: heartless; CREST'LESS, without a crest: not of high birth.--_ns._
CREST'-MARINE', rock samphire; CRESTOL'ATRY, toadyism. [O. Fr. _creste_
(mod. _crête_)--L. _crista_.]

CRETACEOUS, kr[=e]-t[=a]'shus, _adj._ composed of or like chalk.--_adj._
CR[=E]'T[=A]TED, rubbed with chalk.--_n._ CRETIFAC'TION.--_v.i._
CR[=E]'TIFY, to become impregnated with salts of lime. [L. _cretaceus_,
from _creta_, chalk.]

CRETIC, kr[=e]'tik, _adj._ and _n._ Cretan, belonging to _Crete_: a
metrical foot consisting of one short syllable between two long.--_n._
CR[=E]'TISM, a lie.

CRETINISM, kr[=e]'tin-izm, _n._ a state of defective mental development,
associated with bodily deformity or arrested growth, occurring esp. in
connection with enlargement of the thyroid gland or goitre in the lower
Alpine valleys.--_n._ CR[=E]'TIN, one affected with cretinism.--_adjs._
CR[=E]'TINOUS, CR[=E]'TINISED. [Fr. _crétin_--Swiss _crestin_--L.
_christian-us_, prob. implying that, after all, they are human, or that
they are (from their fatuousness) incapable of sin--cf. the frequent use of
_innocent_.]

CRETONNE, kret-on', or kret'on, _n._ a strong printed cotton fabric used
for curtains or for covering furniture. [Fr., prob. from _Creton_ in
Normandy.]

CRETOSE, kr[=e]'t[=o]s, _adj._ chalky.

CREUTZER. Same as KREUTZER.

CREUX, kr[.e], _n._ the reverse of relief in sculpture, intaglio. [Fr.]

CREVASSE, krev-as', _n._ a crack or split, esp. applied to a cleft in a
glacier: (_U.S._) a breach in a canal or river bank.--_v.t._ to fissure
with crevasses. [Fr.]

CREVET, krev'et, _n._ a variant of CRUET, a goldsmith's melting-pot.

CREVICE, krev'is, _n._ a crack or rent: a narrow opening. [O. Fr.
_crevace_--L. L.,--L. _crep[=a]re_, to creak.]

CREW, kr[=oo], _n._ a company, squad, or gang, often in a bad or
contemptuous sense: a ship's company. [O. Fr. _creue_,
increase--_croistre_, to grow.]

CREW, kr[=oo], _pa.t._ of CROW.

CREWE, kr[=oo], _n._ (_Spens._) a cruse. [O. Fr. _crue_.]

CREWEL, kr[=oo]'el, _n._ a fine worsted yarn used for embroidery and
tapestry: work in crewels.--_v.t._ to work in such.--_ns._ CREW'ELIST;
CREW'ELLERY. [Orig. a monosyllable, _crule_, _crewle_; ety. dub.]

CREWELS, kr[=oo]'elz, _n.pl._ (_Scot._) the king's evil, scrofula. [Fr.
_[=e]crouelles_.]

CRIB, krib, _n._ the rack or manger of a stable: a stall for oxen: a
child's bed; a small cottage or hovel, a confined place: (_coll._) a
translation of a classic baldly literal, for lazy schoolboys.--_v.t._ to
put away in a crib, confine: to pilfer: to plagiarise:--_pr.p._ crib'bing;
_pa.p._ cribbed.--_n._ CRIB'-BIT'ING, a vicious habit of horses, consisting
in biting the manger. [A.S. _crib_; Ger. _krippe_.]

CRIBBAGE, krib'[=a]j, _n._ a game at cards played by two, three, or four
persons, so called from _crib_, the name given to certain cards laid aside
from his hand by each player, and which belong to the dealer.--_n._
CRIBB'AGE-BOARD, a board with holes for keeping by means of pegs the score
at cribbage.

CRIBBLE, krib'l, _n._ a coarse screen or sieve used for sand, gravel, or
corn: coarse flour or meal.--_v.t._ to sift or riddle.--_adjs._
CRIB'R[=A]TE, CRIB'ROSE, perforated like a sieve.--_n._ CRIBR[=A]'TION, act
of sifting.--_adj._ CRIB'RIFORM, shaped like a sieve. [L. _cribellum_, dim.
of _cribrum_, a sieve.]

CRIBELLUM, kri-bel'um, _n._ an accessory spinning-organ of certain
spiders--also CRIBRELL'UM:--_pl._ CRIBELL'A.

CRIBLÉ, kr[=e]-bl[=a], _adj._ punctured like a sieve, dotted. [Fr.]

CRICETUS, kri-s[=e]'tus, _n._ the typical genus of _Cricetinæ_, a
sub-family of muroid rodents with cheek-pouches.

CRICK, krik, _n._ a spasm or cramp of the muscles, esp. of the neck. [Prob.
onomatopoeic.]

CRICKET, krik'et, _n._ a saltatory, orthopterous insect, allied to
grasshoppers and locusts. [O. Fr. _criquet_; cf. Dut. _krekel_, Ger.
_kreckel_.]

CRICKET, krik'et, _n._ an outdoor game played with bats, a ball, and
wickets, between two sides of eleven each.--_v.i._ to play at
cricket.--_ns._ CRICK'ETER, one who plays at cricket; CRICK'ET-MATCH, a
match at cricket. [Fr. _criquet_; further ety. dub. Not the A.S. _crycc_, a
stick.]

CRICKET, krik'et, _n._ (_Scot._) a low stool.

CRICOID, kr[=i]'koid, _adj._ (_anat._) ring-shaped. [Gr. _krikos_, a ring,
and _eidos_, form.]

CRIED, kr[=i]d, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of CRY.--_n._ CR[=I]'ER, one who cries
or proclaims, esp. an officer whose duty is to make public
proclamations.--CRIED DOWN, or _Decried_, denounced, belittled; CRIED UP,
extolled.

CRIME, kr[=i]m, _n._ a violation of law: an act punishable by law: offence:
sin.--_adjs._ CRIME'FUL, criminal; CRIME'LESS, without crime, innocent;
CRIMINAL (krim'-), relating to crime: guilty of crime: violating
laws.--_n._ one guilty of crime.--_ns._ CRIM'INALIST, one versed in
criminal law; CRIMINAL'ITY, guiltiness.--_adv._ CRIM'INALLY.--_v.t._
CRIM'IN[=A]TE, to accuse.--_n._ CRIMIN[=A]'TION, act of criminating:
accusation.--_adjs._ CRIM'IN[=A]TIVE, CRIM'IN[=A]TORY, involving
crimination or accusation.--_ns._ CRIMINOL'OGIST; CRIMINOL'OGY, that branch
of anthropology which treats of crime and criminals.--_adj._ CRIM'INOUS,
criminal--now chiefly in the phrase 'a criminous clerk.'--_n._
CRIM'INOUSNESS.--CRIMINAL CONVERSATION, often CRIM. CON., adultery.
[Fr.,--L. _crimen_.]

CRIMINE, CRIMINI, krim'i-ne, _interj._ an ejaculation of surprise or
impatience.

CRIMP, krimp, _adj._ made crisp or brittle.--_v.t._ to wrinkle: to plait:
to make crisp: to seize or decoy sailors or soldiers.--_n._ one who presses
or decoys.--_ns._ CRIMP'AGE, act of crimping; CRIMP'ER, one who or that
which crimps or corrugates; CRIMP'ING-[=I]'RON, an iron instrument used for
crimping hair; CRIMP'ING-MACHINE', a machine for forming crimps or plaits
on ruffles.--_v.t._ CRIMP'LE, to contract or draw together: to plait: to
curl. [A dim. of _cramp_; Dut. _krimpen_, to shrink.]

CRIMSON, krim'zn, _n._ a deep red colour, tinged with blue: red in
general.--_adj._ deep red.--_v.t._ to dye crimson.--_v.i._ to become
crimson: to blush. [M. E. _crimosin_--O. Fr. _cramoisin_; from Ar.
_qermazi_, the cochineal insect, from which it is made.]

CRINAL, kr[=i]'nal, _adj._ of or belonging to the hair.--_adjs._ CRIN'ATE,
-D, having hair; CRINICUL'TURAL, relating to the culture or growth of the
hair; CRINIG'EROUS, hairy; CR[=I]'NITE, hairy: (_bot._) resembling a tuft
of hair. [L. _crinalis_--_crinis_, the hair.]

CRINE, kr[=i]n, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to shrink or shrivel. [Gael. _crìon_,
dry.]

CRINGE, krinj, _v.i._ to bend or crouch with servility: to submit: to fawn:
to flatter with mean servility.--_n._ a servile obeisance.--_ns._
CRINGE'LING, CRIN'GER, one who cringes.--_adv._ CRIN'GINGLY, in an
obsequious manner. [Related to A.S. _crincan_, _cringan_, to shrink. Cf.
CRANK, weak.]

CRINGLE, kring'gl, _n._ a small piece of rope worked into the bolt-rope of
a sail, and containing a metal ring or thimble. [Teut.; cf. Ger.
_kringel_.]

CRINITE. See CRINAL, CRINOIDEA.

CRINKLE, krink'l, _v.t._ to twist, wrinkle, crimp.--_v.i._ to wrinkle up,
curl.--_n._ a wrinkle.--_adj._ CRINK'LY, wrinkly.--_n._ and _adj._
CRINK'UM-CRANK'UM, a word applied familiarly to things intricate or
crooked.

CRINOIDEA, kr[=i]-noid'[=e]-a, _n.pl._ a class of _Echinodermata_,
sometimes called feather-stars or sea-lilies, and well known in fossil
forms as encrinites or stone-lilies.--_n._ CRI'NITE, a fossil
crinoid.--_adjs._ and _ns._ CRINOID', CRINOID'EAN.--_adj._ CRINOID'AL. [Gr.
_krinon_, a lily, and _eidos_, form.]

CRINOLINE, krin'o-lin, _n._ a name originally given by the French
_modistes_ to a stiff fabric of horse-hair, employed to distend women's
attire: a hooped petticoat or skirt made to project all round by means of
steel-wire: a netting round ships as a guard against torpedoes.--_n._
CRIN'OLETTE, a small crinoline causing the dress to project behind
only--akin to the _bustle_ and _dress-improver_.--_adj._ CRIN'OLINED. [Fr.,
_crin_--L. _crinis_, hair, and _lin_--L. _linum_, flax.]

CRINOSE, kr[=i]'n[=o]s, _adj._ hairy. [L. _crinis_, hair.]

CRIO-SPHINX, kr[=i]'[=o]-sfingks, _n._ a ram-headed sphinx. [Gr. _krios_, a
ram, _sphingx_, a sphinx.]

CRIPPLE, krip'l, _n._ a lame person.--_adj._ lame.--_v.t._ to make lame: to
lame: disable, impair the efficiency of.--_ns._ CRIPP'LEDOM; CRIPP'LING, a
prop set up as a support against the side of a building. [A.S. _crypel_;
conn. with CREEP.]

CRISIS, kr[=i]'sis, _n._ point or time for deciding anything, the decisive
moment or turning-point:--_pl._ CRISES (kr[=i]'s[=e]z). [Gr. _krisis_, from
_krinein_, to separate.]

CRISP, krisp, _adj._ curling closely: having a wavy surface: so dry as to
be crumbled easily: brittle, or short, as 'crisp cakes,' &c.: fresh and
bracing, as 'crisp air:' firm, the opposite of limp or flabby, as a 'crisp
style' in writing.--_v.t._ to curl or twist: to make crisp or
wavy.--_adjs._ CRIS'P[=A]TE, -D, having a crisped or wavy
appearance.--_ns._ CRISP[=A]'TION; CRISP'ATURE, a curling; CRISP'ER, one
who or that which crisps; CRISP'ING-[=I]'RON, -PIN, a curling-iron.--_adv._
CRISP'LY.--_n._ CRISP'NESS.--_adj._ CRISP'Y. [A.S.,--L. _crispus_.]

CRISPIN, kris'pin, _n._ a shoemaker, from _Crispin_ of Soissons, the patron
saint of shoemakers, martyred 25th October 287.

CRISS-CROSS, kris'-kros, _n._ a mark formed by two lines in the form of a
cross, as the signature of a person unable to write his name: a child's
game played on a slate, the lines being drawn in the form of a
cross.--_v.i._ to intersect frequently.

CRISTATE, kris't[=a]t, _adj._ crested.--_n._ CRIS'TA, a crest.--_adjs._
CRIS'TIFORM; CRISTIM'ANOUS, having crested claws.

CRITERION, kr[=i]-t[=e]'ri-on, _n._ a means or standard of judging: a test:
a rule, standard, or canon:--_pl._ CRIT[=E]'RIA. [Gr., from _krit[=e]s_, a
judge.]

CRITH, krith, _n._ a chemical unit of mass for gases, the mass of one litre
of hydrogen. [Gr. _krith[=e]_, barley.]

CRITHOMANCY, krith'o-man-si, _n._ divination by the meal strewed over the
victims of sacrifice. [Gr. _krith[=e]_, barley, and _manteia_, divination.]

CRITIC, krit'ik, _n._ one skilled in estimating the quality of literary or
artistic work: a professional reviewer: one skilled in textual or biblical
criticism, literature, the fine arts, &c.: a fault-finder.--_adj._
CRIT'ICAL, relating to criticism: discriminating: captious:
decisive.--_adv._ CRIT'ICALLY.--_ns._ CRIT'ICALNESS, CRITICAL'ITY;
CRIT'ICASTER, CRIT'ICKIN, a petty critic.--_adj._ CRITIC[=I]S'ABLE.--_v.t._
CRIT'ICISE, to pass judgment on: to censure.--_ns._ CRIT'ICISM, the art of
judging, esp. in literature or the fine arts: a critical judgment or
observation; CRITIQUE (kri-t[=e]k'), a critical examination of any
production: a review.--CRITICAL ANGLE, the least angle of incidence at
which a ray is totally reflected; CRITICAL PHILOSOPHY, that of Kant as
based on a critical examination of the faculty of knowledge; CRITICAL
POINT, that temperature below which a substance may, and above which it
cannot, be liquefied by pressure alone.--HIGHER or HISTORICAL CRITICISM, as
distinguished from _Textual_ or _Verbal criticism_, the inquiry into the
composition, date, and authenticity of the books of Scripture, from
historical and literary considerations. [Gr. _kritikos_--_krinein_, to
judge.]

CROAK, kr[=o]k, _v.i._ to utter a low hoarse sound, as a frog or raven: to
grumble: to forebode evil: to utter croakingly: (_slang_) to die.--_n._ the
sound of a frog or raven.--_n._ CROAK'ER.--_adv._ CROAK'ILY.--_n._
CROAK'ING.--_adj._ CROAK'Y. [From the sound. Cf. CRAKE, CROW.]

CROAT, kr[=o]'at, _n._ a native of _Croatia_, esp. one serving as a soldier
in the Austrian army.

CROCEOUS, kr[=o]'shi-us, _adj._ saffron-coloured.

CROCHE, kr[=o]'she, _n._ one of the buds or knobs at the top of a deer's
horn. [Fr.]

CROCHET, kr[=o]'sh[=a], _n._ a kind of handiwork in fancy worsted, cotton,
or silk--an extensive system of looping, by means of a small hook.--_v.i._
to do such work. [Fr. _crochet_--_croche_, _croc_, a hook.]

CROCIDOLITE, kro-sid'o-l[=i]t, _n._ a mineral consisting mainly of silicate
of iron, in asbestos-like fibres. [From Gr. _krokis_, _-idos_, cloth, and
_lithos_, stone.]

CROCK, krok, _n._ a pot or jar.--_n._ CROCK'ERY, earthenware: vessels
formed of baked clay. [A.S. _croc_; Ger. _krug_; perh. of Celt. origin, as
in W. _crochan_, a pot, Gael. _krogan_, a pitcher.]

CROCK, krok, _n._ dirt, smut.--_v.i._ to dirty.

CROCK, krok, _n._ an old ewe: an old horse. [Cf. Norw. and Sw. _krake_, a
poor beast.]

CROCKET, krok'et, _n._ (_archit._) an ornament on the angles of spires,
canopies, &c., like curled leaves or flowers.

CROCODILE, krok'o-d[=i]l, _n._ a genus of large amphibious saurian
reptiles, including the crocodile of the Nile, and also the alligators and
gavials.--_adj._ and _n._ CROCODIL'IAN.--_n._ CROCODIL'ITY, captious
arguing.--CROCODILE TEARS, affected tears, hypocritical grief--from the old
story that crocodiles (which have large lachrymal glands) shed tears over
the hard necessity of killing animals for food. [O. Fr. _cocodrille_--L.
_crocodilus_--Gr. _krokodeilos_, a lizard.]

CROCUS, kr[=o]'kus, _n._ a bulbous plant with brilliant yellow or purple
flowers: (_slang_) a quack doctor. [L. _crocus_--Gr. _krokos_; prob. of
Eastern origin, as Heb. _karkom_, and Ar. _kurkum_, saffron.]

CROFT, kroft, _n._ a small piece arable land adjoining a dwelling: a kind
of small farm.--_ns._ CROFT'ER; CROFT'ING. [A.S. _croft_; perh. cog. with
Dut. _kroft_, or with Gael. _croit_.]

CROISSANT. Same as CRESCENT.

CROMA, kr[=o]'ma, _n._ (_mus._) an eighth note, or quaver.--Also CROME.

CROME, kr[=o]m, CROMB, kr[=oo]m, _n._ a hook or crook.--_v.t._ to draw with
such. [Cf. Dut. _kram_.]

CROMLECH, krom'lek, _n._ a term applied in Brittany to a group of standing
stones, a stone circle: formerly applied to a dolmen, with which it is
still sometimes confounded in England (see DOLMEN). [W. _cromlech_--_crom_,
curved, circular, and _llech_, a stone.]

CROMORNA, kr[=o]-mor'na, _n._ a clarinet-like reed-stop in an organ.
[Fr.,--Ger. _krummhorn_.]

CRONE, kr[=o]n, _n._ an old woman, usually in contempt--sometimes an old
man. [Perh. O. Fr. _carogne_, a crabbed woman; or Celt., as in Ir. _crion_,
withered.]

CRONET, kr[=o]'net, _n._ the hair growing over the top of a horse's hoof.

CRONY, kr[=o]n'i, _n._ an old and intimate companion. [Ety. unknown.]

CROODLE, kr[=oo]d'l, _v.i._ to cower down, or cling close to anything.
[Prob. related to _Cuddle_.]

CROODLE, kr[=oo]d'l, _v.i._ (_Scot._), to coo like a dove, to coax.

CROOK, kr[=oo]k, _n._ a bend, anything bent: a curved tube used to lower
the pitch of a cornet, &c.: the bending of the body in reverence: a staff
bent at the end, as a shepherd's or bishop's: an artifice or trick:
(_Spens._) gibbet.--_v.t._ to bend or form into a hook: to turn from the
straight line or from what is right.--_v.i._ to bend or be bent.--_n._
CROOK'BACK (_Shak._), a hunchback.--_adj._ CROOK'BACKED; CROOK'ED, bent
like a crook: not straight: deviating from rectitude, perverse.--_adv._
CROOK'EDLY.--_n._ CROOK'EDNESS.--_adjs._ CROOK'-KNEED;
CROOK'-SHOUL'DERED.--A CROOK IN THE LOT, any trial in one's experience.
[Prob. Scand.; cf. Ice. _krókr_, Dan. _krog_.]

CROOL, krool, _v.i._ to mutter. [Imit.]

CROON, kr[=oo]n, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to utter a low, monotonous, inarticulate
sound like a baby: to sing or hum in an undertone.--_n._ CROON'ING, a low
murmuring sound. [Cf. Dut. _kreunen_, to groan.]

CROP, krop, _n._ all the produce of a field of grain: anything gathered or
cropped: an entire ox-hide: the craw of a bird: (_archit._) a finial: a
whip-handle: the cutting the hair short.--_v.t._ to cut off the top or
ends: to cut short or close: to mow, reap, or gather.--_v.i._ to
yield:--_pr.p._ crop'ping; _pa.p._ cropped.--_n._ CROP'-EAR, one having
cropped or cut ears.--_adj._ CROP'FUL (_Milt._), satiated.--_ns._ CROP'PER,
one who or that which crops: a plant which furnishes a crop: one who raises
a crop for a share of it: a kind of fancy pigeon remarkable for its large
crop; CROP'PING, act of cutting off: the raising of crops: (_geol._) an
outcrop; CROP'PY, one of the Irish rebels of 1798 who cut their hair short
in imitation of the French Revolutionists.--_adj._ CROP'-SICK, sick of a
surfeit.--CROP OUT, to appear above the surface; CROP UP, to come up
incidentally. [A.S. _crop_, the top shoot of a plant, the crop of a bird;
Dut. _crop_, a bird's crop.]

CROPPER, krop'[.e]r, _n._ a fall; failure.--COME A CROPPER, to have a fall,
perhaps from phrase 'neck and crop.'

CROQUET, kr[=o]'k[=a], _n._ a game in which two or more players try to
drive wooden balls, by means of long-handled mallets, through a series of
arches set in the ground. [North Fr. _croquet_, a dial. form of _crochet_,
dim. of _croc_, _croche_, a crook.]

CROQUETTE, krok-et', _n._ a ball of minced meat or fish, seasoned and
fried. [Fr. _croquer_, to crunch.]

CRORE, kr[=o]r, _n._ the sum of ten millions, or one hundred lacs. [Hind.]

[Illustration]

CROSIER, CROZIER, kr[=o]'zh[.e]r, _n._ a cross mounted on a staff, borne
before archbishops and patriarchs--often confounded with the pastoral
staff.--_adj._ CR[=O]'SIERED. [O. Fr. _crocier_--Late L. _crociarius_--L.
_crux_, a cross.]

[Illustration]

CROSS, kros, _n._ a gibbet on which malefactors were hung, consisting of
two pieces of timber, one placed crosswise on the other, either thus [Latin
cross] or [St Andrew's cross]: the instrument on which Christ suffered, and
thus the symbol of the Christian religion: the sufferings of Christ: the
atonement effected by these: a representation of the cross, a staff
surmounted by a cross, a monument, model, or ornament in the form of a
cross, esp. that in this form in the centre of a town at which
proclamations are made, &c.: (_Scot._) a signal or call to arms sent
throughout a district, being a cross of two sticks charred and dipped in
blood (FIERY CROSS): the transverse part of an anchor, or the like: a
surveyor's cross-staff: anything that crosses or thwarts: a crossing or
crossway: adversity or affliction in general.--_v.t._ to mark with a cross,
or to make the sign of the cross.--_ns._ CROSS'-AISLE, a transept aisle of
a cruciform church; CROSS'-BEAR'ER, one who carries a cross in a
procession; CROSS'-BUN, a bun marked with the form of a cross, eaten on
Good-Friday; CROSS'ING, the making the sign of the cross; CROSS'-STITCH, a
double stitch in the form of a cross; CROSS'LET, a little cross.--CROST,
obsolete _pa.p._ of CROSS.--CROSS-AND-PILE, the obverse and reverse side of
a coin, head and tail; CROSS OF CALVARY, the Latin cross or cross of
crucifixion elevated on three steps; CROSS OF JERUSALEM, one having each
arm capped by a cross-bar; CROSS OF LORRAINE, a cross with two horizontal
arms, combining the Greek and Latin crosses; CROSS OF ST JAMES, a Latin
cross figured as a sword; CROSS OF ST PATRICK, the saltier cross of Ireland
(red on a white ground).--CROSS ONE'S MIND, to flash across the mind; CROSS
THE PATH OF ANY ONE, to thwart him.--ANSATE CROSS (_crux ansata_), a common
symbol of immortality in ancient Egypt; ARCHIEPISCOPAL CROSS, the pastoral
staff surmounted by a cross; BUDDHIST CROSS, the gammadion or fylfot, with
returned arms, a symbol found in prehistoric remains in Italy and
elsewhere; CAPITAL CROSS, a Greek cross having each extremity terminated in
an ornament like a Tuscan capital; CAPUCHIN-CROSS, a cross having each arm
terminated by a ball; CELTIC CROSS, a type of cross found in Ireland and in
the north and west of Scotland, varying from a cross incised on a flat
slate to an elaborate cruciform monument--some crosses of this type show
Scandinavian workmanship, and hence are often called RUNIC CROSSES; GREEK
CROSS, an upright cross with limbs of equal length--the well-known CROSS OF
ST GEORGE (red on a white ground); LATIN CROSS (_crux immissa_), an upright
cross having the lower limb longer than the others; MALTESE CROSS, the
badge of the knights of Malta, converging to a point in the centre, with
two points to each limb; NORMAN CROSS, an elaborate memorial cross like a
Gothic turret set on the ground, or on the base of a few steps, with niches
for figures and pinnacles; PATRIARCHAL CROSS, a cross with two horizontal
bars; ROUEN CROSS, a cross in fretwork, as a brooch or pendant; ST ANDREW'S
CROSS (_crux decussata_), or CROSS SALTIER, a cross of two shafts of equal
length crossed diagonally at the middle--the saltier cross of Scotland
(white on a blue ground); ST ANTHONY'S CROSS (_crux commissa_), shaped like
a [St Anthony's cross]; SOUTHERN CROSS, a constellation in the Antarctic
region where the stars are in the form of a cross. [O. Fr. _crois_ (Fr.
_croix_)--L. _cruc-em_, orig. an upright post to which latterly a
cross-piece was added.]

CROSS, kros, _adj._ lying across: transverse: oblique: opposite: adverse:
ill-tempered: interchanged: dishonest: balancing, neutralising.--_adv._
across.--_n._ a crossing or mixing of breeds, esp. of cattle: something
intermediate in character between two other things: dishonest practices,
esp. in a sporting contest when one of the parties corruptly allows himself
to be beaten.--_v.t._ to lay one body or draw one line across another: to
cancel by drawing cross lines: to pass from side to side: to write across a
bank-cheque the name of a banking company, or simply '& Co.' between the
lines, to be filled up with the name of a banking company, through whom
alone it may be paid: to obstruct: to thwart: to interfere with.--_v.i._ to
lie or be athwart: to move or pass from place to place.--_n._
CROSS'-AC'TION (_law_), an action brought by the defender against the
pursuer in the same cause.--_adjs._ CROSS'-ARMED, having the arms crossed:
(_bot._) brachiate; CROSS'-BAND'ED, having the grain of the veneer run
across that of the rail--of a hand-rail.--_n._ CROSS'-BAR, a transverse
bar: a kind of lever.--_adj._ CROSS'-BARRED.--_ns._ CROSS'-BEAM, a large
beam stretching across a building and serving to hold its sides together;
CROSS'-BENCH, in the House of Lords, certain benches so placed, on which
independent members sometimes sit; CROSS'-BILL, a bill brought by the
defendant in a Chancery suit against the plaintiff; CROSS'-BILL, a genus of
birds resembling bullfinches, linnets, &c., with the mandibles of the bill
crossing each other near the points; CROSS'-BIRTH, a birth in which the
child lies transversely in the uterus.--_v.t._ CROSS'BITE, to bite the
biter.--_n.pl._ CROSS'-BONES, a figure of two thigh-bones laid across each
other--together with the skull, a conventional emblem of death.--_ns._
CROSS'BOW, a weapon for shooting arrows, formed of a bow placed crosswise
on a stock; CROSS'BOWER, -BOWMAN, one who uses a crossbow.--_adj._
CROSS'-BRED.--_ns._ CROSS'-BREED, a breed produced by the crossing or
intermixing of different races; CROSS'-BREED'ING; CROSS'-BUTT'OCK, a
particular throw over the hip in wrestling; CROSS'-CHEQUE (see
CHEQUE).--_adj._ CROSS'-COUN'TRY, across the fields rather than by the
road.--_n._ CROSS'-CUT, a short road across from one point to
another.--_v.t._ to cut across.--_ns._ CROSS'CUT-SAW, a large saw worked by
two men, one at each end, for cutting beams crosswise; CROSS'-DIVI'SION,
the division of any group into divisions that cut across each other and
produce confusion.--_adj._ CROSSED, marked by a line drawn crosswise, often
denoting cancellation: folded: cruciate.--_n._
CROSS'-EXAMIN[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ CROSS'-EXAM'INE, to test the evidence of a
witness by subjecting him to an examination by the opposite party.--_adj._
CROSS'-EYED, having a squint.--_ns._ CROSS'-FERTILIS[=A]'TION, the
fecundation of a plant by pollen from another; CROSS'-FIRE (_mil._), the
crossing of lines of fire from two or more points; CROSS'-GAR'NET, a
T-shaped hinge.--_adjs._ CROSS'-GAR'TERED (_Shak._), wearing the garters
crossed on the leg; CROSS'-GRAINED, having the grain or fibres crossed or
intertwined: perverse: contrary: intractable.--_ns._ CROSS'-GRAIN'EDNESS;
CROSS'-GUARD, the bar, at right angles to the blade, forming the hilt-guard
of a sword; CROSS'-HATCH'ING, the art of shading by parallel intersecting
lines; CROSS'-HEAD, a beam across the head of something, esp. the bar at
the end of the piston-rod of a steam-engine; CROSS'ING, act of going
across: the place where a roadway, &c. may be crossed: intersection: act of
thwarting: cross-breeding.--_adj._ CROSS'-LEGGED, having the legs
crossed.--_adv._ CROSS'LY.--_ns._ CROSS'NESS; CROSS'-PATCH, an ill-natured
person; CROSS'-PIECE, a piece of material of any kind crossing another:
(_naut._) a timber over the windlass, with pins for belaying the running
rigging; CROSS'-PUR'POSE, a contrary purpose: contradictory conduct or
system: an enigmatical game; CROSS'-QUAR'TERS, an ornament of tracery like
the four petals of a cruciform flower: a quatrefoil.--_v.t._
CROSS'-QUES'TION, to question minutely, to cross-examine.--_ns._
CROSS'-REF'ERENCE, a reference in a book to another title or passage;
CROSS'-ROAD, a road crossing the principal road, a bypath; CROSS'-ROW (same
as CHRIST-CROSS-ROW); CROSS'-SEA, a sea that sets at an angle to the
direction of the wind; CROSS'-SILL, a railroad sleeper lying under the
rails transversely as a support to the stringer; CROSS'-SPRING'ER, a
cross-rib in a groined vault; CROSS'-STAFF, a surveying instrument
consisting of a staff surmounted with a brass circle divided into four
equal parts by two intersecting lines; CROSS'-STONE, chiastolite:
staurolite: harmotome; CROSS'-TIE, in a railroad, a timber placed under
opposite rails as a support; CROSS'-TIN'ING, a mode of harrowing
crosswise.--_n.pl._ CROSS'TREES, pieces of timber placed across the upper
end of the lower-masts and top-masts of a ship.--_ns._ CROSS'-VAULT'ING,
vaulting formed by the intersection of two or more simple vaults;
CROSS'WAY, a way that crosses another; CROSS'-WIND, an unfavourable wind, a
side-wind.--_adv._ CROSS'WISE, in the form of a cross: across.--CROSS AS
TWO STICKS, particularly perverse and disagreeable.--CROSS THE PATH of any
one, to thwart him; CROSS ONE'S MIND, to flash across the mind.

CROSSE, kros, _n._ the implement used in _lacrosse_.

CROSSETTE, kro-set', _n._ a small projecting part of an impost-stone at the
extremity of an arch: a shoulder in an arch-stone fitting into the stone
next to it. [Fr.]

CROTALARIA, kr[=o]-ta-l[=a]'ri-a, _n._ a genus of _Leguminosæ_, the
rattlewort. [Gr. _krotalon_, a rattle.]

CROTALIDÆ, kr[=o]-tal'i-d[=e], _n.pl._ a family of venomous serpents,
including rattlesnakes, copper-heads, &c.

CROTALO, kr[=o]'ta-l[=o], _n._ a Turkish musical instrument, like the
ancient cymbalum.

CROTCH, kroch, _n._ a fork, as of a tree: the bifurcation of the human
body.--_adj._ CROTCHED. [Ety. obscure.]

CROTCHET, kroch'et, _n._ a hook: a note in music, equal to half a minim,
[Crotchet]: a crooked or perverse fancy: a whim, or conceit.--_adjs._
CROTCH'ETED, CROTCH'ETY, having crotchets or peculiarities:
whimsical.--_n._ CROTCH'ETEER, a crotchety person. [Fr. _crochet_, dim. of
_croche_, a hook. See CROCHET.]

CROTON, kr[=o]'ton, _n._ a genus of tropical plants, producing a
brownish-yellow oil, having a hot, biting taste.--_ns._ CR[=O]'TONATE, a
salt formed by the union of crotonic acid with a base; CR[=O]'TON-OIL, a
powerful purgative oil, expressed from the seeds of the _Croton tiglium_,
also used externally.--CROTON'IC ACID, an acid obtained from croton-oil.
[Gr. _krot[=o]n_, a tick or mite, which the seed of the plant resembles.]

CROTTLES, krot'ls, _n.pl._ lichens used for dyeing. [Gael. _crotal_.]

CROUCH, krowch, _v.i._ to squat or lie close to the ground: to cringe: to
fawn. [Possibly _crook_.]

CROUCHED-FRIARS = CRUTCHED-FRIARS. See CRUTCH.

CROUCH-WARE, krowch'-w[=a]r, _n._ a finely finished pottery made with an
admixture of pipe-clay in Shropshire: the famous salt-glazed stoneware made
at Burslem.

CROUP, kr[=oo]p, _n._ a severe disease in the throat of children,
accompanied by a hoarse cough.--_v.i._ to cry or speak hoarsely.--_n._
CROUP'INESS.--_adjs._ CROUP'OUS, CROUP'Y. [A.S. _kropan_, to cry; Scot.
_roup_, _croup_, hoarseness; from the sound.]

CROUP, kr[=oo]p, _n._ the rump of a horse: the place behind the
saddle.--_n._ CROUP'ON (_obs._), the croup: the human buttocks. [Fr.
_croupe_, a protuberance; allied to CROP.]

CROUPADE, kroo-p[=a]d', _n._ in the manège, a leap in which the horse draws
up his hind-legs toward the belly. [Fr.]

CROUPER, kr[=oo]p'[.e]r, _n._ obsolete form of CRUPPER.

CROUPIER, kr[=oo]'pi-[.e]r, _n._ one who sits at the lower end of the table
as assistant-chairman at a public dinner: a vice-president: he who watches
the cards and collects the money at the gaming-table. [Fr., 'one who rides
on the croup.']

CROUSE, kr[=oo]s, _adj._ (_Scot._) lively, pert.--_adv._ boldly,
pertly.--_adv._ CROUSE'LY. [M. E. _cr[=u]s_; cf. Ger. _kraus_, Dut.
_kroes_, crisp, cross.]

CROUT, krowt, _n._ See SAUER-KRAUT.

CROW, kr[=o], _n._ a large bird, generally black, of the genus _Corvus_,
which includes magpies, nut-crackers, jays, choughs, &c.: the cry of a
cock: a crow-bar.--_v.i._ to croak: to cry as a cock, in joy or defiance:
to boast, swagger (with _over_):--_pa.t._ crew (kr[=oo]) or crowed; _pa.p._
crowed.--_ns._ CROW'-BAR, a large iron bar mostly bent at the end, to be
used as a lever; CROW'-BERR'Y, a small creeping shrub, producing small
black berries; CROW'-FLOW'ER (_Shak._), perhaps the same as CROW'FOOT, a
common weed, the flower of which is like a crow's foot, the buttercup:
crow's-foot: a number of lines rove through a long wooden block, supporting
the backbone of an awning horizontally; CROW'-KEEP'ER (_Shak._), a
scarecrow; CROW'-QUILL, a pen made of the quill of a crow, &c., for fine
writing or etching; CROW'S'-BILL, CROW'-BILL (_surg._), a kind of forceps
for extracting bullets, &c., from wounds; CROW'S'-FOOT, one of the wrinkles
produced by age, spreading out from the corners of the eyes: (_mil._) a
caltrop; CROW'S'-NEST (_naut._), a shelter at the top-gallant mast-head of
whalers for the man on the lookout.--_n.pl._ CROW'-STEPS (see
CORBIE).--_n._ CROW'-TOE (_Milt._), probably the same as CROWFOOT.--AS THE
CROW FLIES, in a straight line; EAT CROW, or BOILED CROW, to be forced to
do something very disagreeable; HAVE A CROW TO PLUCK WITH, to have
something to settle with some one. [A.S. _crawe_, a crow, _crawan_, to cry
like a cock; imit.]

CROWD, krowd, _n._ a number of persons or things closely pressed together,
without order: the rabble: multitude.--_v.t._ to gather into a lump or
crowd: to fill by pressing or driving together: to compress.--_v.i._ to
press on: to press together in numbers: to swarm.--_p.adj._
CROWD'ED.--CROWD SAIL, to carry a press of sail for speed. [A.S. _crúdan_,
to press.]

CROWD, krowd, _n._ (_obs._) an ancient musical instrument of the nature of
the violin.--_n._ CROWD'ER (_obs._), a fiddler. [W. _crwth_, a hollow
protuberance, a fiddle; Gael., Ir. _cruit_.]

CROWDIE, krowd'i, _n._ a mixture of meal and water: (_Scot._) brose. [Der.
unknown.]

CROWN, krown, _n._ the diadem or state-cap of royalty: regal power: the
sovereign: honour: reward, as the 'martyr's crown:' the top of anything,
esp. of the head: completion: accomplishment; a coin stamped with a crown,
esp. the silver 5s. piece--used also as the translation of the old French
_écu_, worth from six francs (or livres) to three francs: a size of paper,
because originally water-marked with a crown: (_archit._) a species of
spire or lantern, formed by converging flying-buttresses.--_v.t._ to cover
or invest with a crown: to invest with royal dignity: to adorn: to dignify:
to complete happily.--_ns._ CROWN'-AG'ENT, a solicitor in Scotland who
prepares criminal prosecutions; CROWN'-ANT'LER, the uppermost antler of the
horn of a stag; CROWN'-COL'ONY, a colony whose administration is directly
under the home government; CROWN DERBY PORCELAIN (see PORCELAIN).--_p.adj._
CROWNED, having or wearing a crown: rewarded: consummated.--_ns._ CROWN'ER
(_Shak._), a corruption of coroner; CROWN'ET, a coronet: (_Shak._) that
which crowns or accomplishes; CROWN'-GLASS, a kind of window-glass formed
in circular plates or discs; CROWN'-IMP[=E]'RIAL, a plant, a species of
fritillary; CROWN'ING.--_n.pl._ CROWN'-JEW'ELS, jewels pertaining to the
crown or sovereign.--_ns._ CROWN'-LAND, land belonging to the crown or
sovereign; CROWN'-LAW'YER, the lawyer who acts for the crown in criminal
cases.--_adj._ CROWN'LESS.--_ns._ CROWN'LET, a small crown; CROWN'-LIV'ING,
a church living in the gift of the crown; CROWN-OFFICE, the office for the
business of the crown side of the King's Bench: the office in which the
great seal is affixed; CROWN'-P[=A]'PER, in England, a printing-paper of
the size 15 × 20 in.: in America, a writing-paper 15 × 19 in.; CROWN'-POST,
the same as KING-POST (q.v.); CROWN'-PRINCE, the prince who succeeds to the
crown; CROWN'-SAW, a circular saw made by cutting teeth round a cylinder;
CROWN'-WHEEL, a wheel resembling a crown, with teeth or cogs set at right
angles to its plane; CROWN'-WIT'NESS, a witness for the crown in a criminal
prosecution instituted by it; CROWN'WORK (_fort._), an outwork composed of
a bastion between two curtains, with demi-bastions at the extremes.--CROWN
OF THE CAUSEWAY, the middle of the street. [O. Fr. _corone_ (Fr.
_couronne_)--L. _corona_; cf. Gr. _kor[=o]nos_, curved.]

CROZE, kr[=o]z, _n._ the groove in the staves of a cask in which the edge
of the head is set.

CROZIER. See CROSIER.

CRUCIAL, kr[=oo]'shi-al, _adj._ testing, searching, from the practice of
marking a testing instance with a cross to draw attention to it.--_adj._
CRU'CI[=A]TE (_bot._), arranged in the form of a cross, as leaves or
petals. [Fr. _crucial_, from L. _crux_, _crucis_, a cross.]

CRUCIAN, CRUSIAN, kroo'shi-an, _n._ the German carp, having no barbels.

CRUCIBLE, kr[=oo]'si-bl, _n._ an earthen pot for melting ores, metals, &c.
[Low L. _crucibulum_, most prob. from L. _crux_.]

CRUCIFERÆ, kroo-sif'[.e]r-[=e], _n._ a natural order of exogenous plants
(many edible), having a corolla of four petals arranged in the form of a
cross.--_n._ CRUC'IFER, a cross-bearer in a procession.--_adj._
CRUCIF'EROUS (_bot._), bearing four petals in the form of a cross. [L.
_crux_, _crucis_, a cross, _ferre_, to bear.]

CRUCIFY, kr[=oo]'si-f[=i], _v.t._ to put to death by fixing the hands and
feet to a cross: to subdue completely: to mortify: to torment:--_pa.p._
cru'cified.--_ns._ CRUCIF[=I]'ER, one who crucifies; CRU'CIFIX, a figure or
picture of Christ fixed to the cross; CRUCIFIX'ION, death on the cross,
esp. that of Christ.--_adjs._ CRU'CIFORM, in the form of a cross;
CRUCIG'EROUS, bearing a cross. [O. Fr. _crucifier_--L. _crucifig[)e]re_,
_crucifixum_--_crux_, and _fig[)e]re_, to fix.]

CRUDE, kr[=oo]d, _adj._ raw, unprepared: not reduced to order or form:
unfinished: undigested: immature.--_adv._ CRUDE'LY.--_ns._ CRUDE'NESS;
CRUD'ITY, rawness: unripeness: that which is crude.--_adj._ CRUD'Y
(_Shak._), crude, raw. [L. _crudus_, raw.]

CRUEL, kr[=oo]'el, _adj._ disposed to inflict pain, or pleased at
suffering: void of pity, merciless, savage: severe.--_adj._
CRU'EL-HEART'ED, delighting in cruelty: hard-hearted: unrelenting.--_adv._
CRU'ELLY.--_ns._ CRU'ELNESS (_obs._); CRU'ELTY. [Fr. _cruel_--L.
_crudelis_.]

CRUET, kr[=oo]'et, _n._ a small jar or phial for sauces and
condiments.--_n._ CRU'ET-STAND, a stand or frame for holding cruets. [Acc.
to Skeat, prob. formed from Dut. _kruik_, a jar = Eng. _crock_; and acc. to
E. Müller, dim. of O. Fr. _cruye_ (mod. Fr. _cruche_, _cruchette_, a jar),
from root of _crock_.]

CRUISE, kr[=oo]z, _v.i._ to sail to and fro: to rove on the sea.--_n._ a
sailing to and fro: a voyage in various directions in search of an enemy,
or for the protection of vessels.--_n._ CRUIS'ER. [Dut. _kruisen_, to
cross--_kruis_, a cross.]

CRUISIE. See CRUSIE.

CRUISKEN, kroos'ken, _n._ (_Ir._) a small bottle.--Also CRUIS'KEEN.

CRUIVE, CRUVE, kr[=oo]v, _n._ (_Scot._) a sty, hovel: a wattled hedge built
on tidal flats for catching fish.

CRULLER, krul'[.e]r, _n._ a cake cut from rolled dough made of eggs,
butter, sugar, flour, &c., fried crisp in boiling lard. [Cf. Dut.
_krullen_, to curl.]

CRUMB, krum, _n._ a small bit or morsel of bread: a small particle of
anything: the soft part of bread.--_v.t._ to break into crumbs: to fill
with crumbs.--_ns._ CRUMB'-BRUSH, a brush for sweeping crumbs off the
table; CRUMB'-CLOTH, a cloth laid under a table to keep falling crumbs from
the carpet.--_adjs._ CRUMB'Y, CRUM'MY, in crumbs: soft. [A.S. _cruma_; Dut.
_kruim_; Ger. _krume_; allied to _crimp_.]

CRUMBLE, krum'bl, _v.t._ to break into crumbs: to scatter in
crumbs.--_v.i._ to fall into small pieces: to decay.--_n._ a crumb: that
which crumbles easily.--_adj._ CRUMB'LY, apt to crumble, brittle. [Orig.
dim. of CRUMB; Dut. _kruimelen_; Ger. _krümeln_.]

CRUMENAL, kr[=oo]'me-nal, _n._ (_Spens._) a purse. [From L. _crumena_, a
purse.]

CRUMP, krump, _adj._ crooked: wrinkled.--_ns._ CRUM'MY, a cow with a
crumpled horn; CRUMP'ET, a kind of crumby or soft cake or muffin.--_adj._
CRUMP'Y, crump: easily broken. [A.S. _crump_--_crumb_, crooked; Ger.
_krumm_. Cf. CRAMP, CRIMP.]

CRUMPLE, krump'l, _v.t._ to contort: to mark with or draw into folds or
wrinkles: to crease.--_v.i._ to become wrinkled: to contract or
shrink.--_adj._ CRUMP'LED.--_n._ CRUMP'LING. [Formed from CRUMP.]

CRUNCH, krunsh, _v.t._ to crush with the teeth: to chew anything hard, and
so make a noise.--_n._ the act of crunching. [From the sound; cf. Fr.
_grincer_.]

CRUNKLE, krunk'l, _v.i._ to crumple.

CRUNT, krunt, _n._ (_Scot._) a blow on the head.

CRUOR, kr[=oo]'or, _n._ coagulated blood.--_n._ CRU'ORINE, the red
colouring matter of blood corpuscles.

CRUP, krup, _adj._ (_prov._) brittle.

CRUPPER, krup'[.e]r, _n._ a strap of leather fastened to the saddle and
passing under the horse's tail to keep the saddle in its place: the hind
part of a horse. [Fr. _cropière_--_crope_, the croup.]

CRURAL, kr[=oo]'ral, _adj._ belonging to or shaped like a leg. [L.
_cruralis_, from _crus_, _cruris_, the leg.]

CRUSADE, kroo-s[=a]d', _n._ a military expedition under the banner of the
cross to recover the Holy Land from the Turks: any daring or romantic
undertaking.--_v.i._ to go on a crusade.--_n._ CRUSAD'ER, one engaged in a
crusade. [Fr. _croisade_--Prov. _crozada_--_croz_, a cross--L. _crux_, a
cross.]

CRUSADO, kroo-s[=a]'do, _n._ a Portuguese coin, so called because marked
with a cross. [Port. _cruzado_.]

CRUSE, kr[=oo]z, _n._ an earthen pot: a small cup or bottle. [Cf. Ice.
_krus_; Dan. _kruus_; Ger. _krause_.]

CRUSET, kr[=oo]'set, _n._ a goldsmith's crucible. [Fr. _creuset_.]

CRUSH, krush, _v.t._ to break or bruise: to squeeze together: to beat down
or overwhelm: to subdue: to ruin.--_v.i._ to become broken under
pressure.--_n._ a violet squeezing: a vast crowd of persons or
things.--_adj._ CRUSHED, broken by pressure: subdued: oppressed.--_ns._
CRUSH'ER, he who, or that which, crushes or subdues: (_slang_) a policeman;
CRUSH'-HAT, a hat so constructed as to collapse and become flat: an
opera-hat.--_adj._ CRUSH'ING, bruising: overwhelming.--_adv._
CRUSH'INGLY.--_n._ CRUSH'-ROOM, a room in a theatre, &c., where the
audience may promenade during the intervals of the entertainment.--CRUSH A
CUP, to empty a cup: to quaff.--CRUSHED STRAWBERRY, of the colour of
strawberries that have been crushed. [O. Fr. _croissir_; per. cog. with
Mid. High Ger. _krosen_, to crunch.]

CRUSIE, CRUSY, kr[=oo]z'i, _n._ (_Scot._) a lamp which burns oil. [From
CRUSET.]

CRUST, krust, _n._ the hard rind or outside coating of anything: the outer
part of bread: covering of a pie, &c.: (_geol._) the solid exterior of the
earth.--_v.t._ to cover with a crust or hard case.--_v.i._ to gather into a
hard crust.--_adj._ CRUST[=A]T'ED, covered with a crust.--_n._
CRUST[=A]'TION, an adherent crust.--_adv._ CRUST'ILY.--_n._
CRUST'INESS.--_adj._ CRUST'Y, of the nature of or having a crust, as port
or other wine: having a hard or harsh exterior: hard: snappy: surly. [O.
Fr.,--L. _crusta_, rind.]

CRUSTA, krus'ta, _n._ something, as a gem, prepared for inlaying: a hard
coating: a cocktail served in a glass, its rim encrusted in sugar:--_pl._
CRUSTÆ ([=e]).

CRUSTACEA, krus-t[=a]'shi-a, _n.pl._ a large class of Arthropod animals,
almost all aquatic, including crabs, lobsters, shrimps, sand-hoppers,
wood-lice, water-fleas, barnacles, acorn-shells, &c.--_n._ CRUST[=A]'CEAN,
one of the crustacea.--_adj._ CRUSTACEOLOG'ICAL.--_ns._ CRUSTACEOL'OGIST;
CRUSTACEOL'OGY, the science which treats of the crustacea.--_adjs._
CRUST[=A]'CEOUS, CRUST[=A]'CEAN, pertaining to the crustacea, or shellfish.

CRUT, krut, _n._ (_prov._) a dwarf.

CRUTCH, kruch, _n._ a staff with a cross-piece at the head to place under
the arm of a lame person: any support like a crutch.--_v.t._ to support: to
prop.--_v.i._ to go on crutches.--_adj._ CRUTCHED, marked by the sign of or
wearing a cross.--_n.pl._ CRUTCHED'-FR[=I]'ARS, an order of friars so
called from the sign of the cross which they wore--_Crouched-_ or
_Crossed-friars_. [From root of CROOK; perh. modified by L. _crux_.]

CRUX, kruks, _n._ a cross: (_fig._) something that occasions difficulty.
[L. _crux_, a cross.]

CRWTH, kröth, _n._ an old Welsh stringed instrument, four of its six
strings played with a bow, two twitched by the thumb. [W.]

CRY, kr[=i], _v.i._ to utter a shrill loud sound, esp. one expressive of
pain or grief: to lament: to weep: to bawl.--_v.t._ to utter loudly: to
proclaim or make public:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ cried.--_n._ any loud sound,
esp. of grief or pain: a fit of weeping: a pack of hounds, hence of people:
particular sound uttered by an animal: bawling: lamentation: prayer:
clamour:--_pl._ CRIES.--_ns._ CR[=I]'ER; CRY'ING, act of calling loudly:
weeping.--_adj._ calling loudly: claiming notice: notorious.--CRY AGAINST,
to protest against; CRY DOWN, to condemn: to decry; CRY OFF, to withdraw
from a bargain; CRY ON, to call upon: to invoke; CRY UP, to praise:
extol.--A FAR CRY, a great distance; GREAT CRY AND LITTLE WOOL, appearance
without reality: much ado about nothing; HUE AND CRY (see HUE); IN FULL
CRY, in full pursuit, used of dogs in hunt; WITHIN CRY OF, within hearing
distance. [Fr. _crier_--L. _quirit[=a]re_, to scream--freq. of L. _queri_,
to lament.]

CRYOLITE, kr[=i]'o-l[=i]t, _n._ a mineral found on the coast of Greenland,
consisting mainly of a fluoride of aluminium in combination with fluoride
of sodium. [Gr. _kryos_, frost, and _lithos_, a stone.]

CRYOPHORUS, kr[=i]-of'o-rus, _n._ an instrument for showing the decrease of
temperature in water by evaporation. [Gr. _kryos_, frost, and _pherein_, to
bear.]

CRYPT, kript, _n._ an underground cell or chapel, esp. one used for
burial.--_adjs._ CRYP'TIC, -AL, hidden: secret: unseen. [L. _crypta_--Gr.
_krypt[=e]_--_kryptein_, to conceal. Doublet of GROT.]

CRYPTOGAMIA, krip-to-g[=a]'mi-a, _n._ the class of flowerless plants, or
those which have their fructification concealed.--_n._ CRYP'TOGAM.--_adjs._
CRYPTOG[=A]'MIAN, CRYPTOGAM'IC, CRYPTOG'AMOUS.--_ns._ CRYPTOG'AMIST;
CRYPTOG'AMY. [Gr. _kryptos_, concealed, and _gamos_, marriage.]

CRYPTOGRAM, krip't[=o]-gram, _n._ a cryptograph.--_ns._ CRYPTAD'IA, things
to be kept secret; CRYPTOL'OGY, secret language; CRYP'TONYM, a secret name.

CRYPTOGRAPHY, krip-tog'ra-fi, _n._ the art of secret writing: the character
or cipher so used.--_ns._ CRYPT'OGRAPH; CRYPTOG'RAPHER.--_adjs._
CRYPTOGRAPH'IC, -AL. [Gr. _kryptos_, secret, and _graphein_, to write.]

CRYSTAL, kris'tal, _n._ a superior kind of quartz, clear like ice:
(_chem._) a piece of matter which has assumed a definite geometrical form,
with plane faces.--_adjs._ CRYS'TAL, CRYS'TALL[=I]NE, consisting of or like
crystal in clearness, &c.; CRYS'TALFORM; CRYS'TALL[=I]SABLE, capable of
being crystallised or formed into crystals.--_n._ CRYSTALL[=I]S[=A]'TION,
the act of crystallising.--_v.t._ CRYS'TALL[=I]SE, to reduce to the form of
a crystal.--_v.i._ to assume a crystalline form.--_ns._ CRYS'TALLITE;
CRYSTALLOGEN'ESIS.--_adj._ CRYSTALLOGEN'IC.--_n._ CRYSTALLOG'RAPHER, one
skilled in crystallography.--_adj._ CRYSTALLOGRAPH'IC--_n._
CRYSTALLOG'RAPHY, the science of crystallisation.--_adj._ CRYS'TALLOID,
having the form of a crystal.--_n._ a name given by Graham to a class of
substances which when in solution pass easily through membranes.--_n._
CRYS'TALLOMANCY, a mode of divination by means of transparent bodies. [O.
Fr. _cristol_--L. _crystallum_--Gr. _krystallos_, ice--_kryos_, frost.]

CTENOID, t[=e]'noid, _adj._ comb-shaped, applied by Agassiz to the scales
and fins of certain fishes, as the perch, &c.--_adj._ and _n._ CTENOID'EAN.
[Gr. _kteis_, _ktenos_, a comb, _eidos_, form.]

CTENOPHORA, ten-of'o-ra, _n.pl._ a sub-class of Coelenterates--beautifully
delicate, free-swimming marine organisms, generally globular, moving by
means of comb-like plates. [Gr. _kteis_, _ktenos_, a comb, _pherein_, to
carry.]

CUB, kub, _n._ the young of certain animals, as foxes, &c.: a whelp: a
young boy or girl (in contempt).--_v.i._ to bring forth young:--_pr.p._
cub'bing; _pa.p._ cubbed.--_adjs._ CUB'BISH, like a cub: awkward;
CUB'-DRAWN (_Shak._), drawn or sucked by cubs.--_n._ CUB'HOOD.--_adj._
CUB'LESS, without cubs. [Prob. Celt., as Ir. _cuib_, a whelp, from _cu_, a
dog.]

CUB, kub, _n._ a cattle-pen: chest.

CUBAN, k[=u]'ban, _n._ a native of the island of _Cuba_ in the West
Indies.--_adj._ pertaining to Cuba.

CUBE, k[=u]b, _n._ a solid body having six equal square faces, a solid
square: the third power of a number, as--2 × 2 × 2 = 8.--_v.t._ to raise to
the third power.--_ns._ C[=U]'BAGE, CUB[=A]'TION, C[=U]'BATURE, the act of
finding the solid or cubic content of a body: the result thus
found.--_adjs._ C[=U]'BIC, -AL, pertaining to a cube: of the third power or
degree: solid.--_adv._ C[=U]'BICALLY.--_n._ C[=U]'BICALNESS, state or
quality of being cubical.--_adjs._ C[=U]'BIFORM; C[=U]'BOID, CUBOID'AL,
resembling a cube in shape.--CUBE ROOT, the number or quantity that
produces a given cube by being raised to the third power--thus 2 is the
cube root of 8. [Fr.,--L. _cubus_--Gr. _kybos_, a die.]

CUBEB, k[=u]'beb, _n._ the dried berry of _Piper cubeba_, a climbing shrub,
native to Sumatra--useful as a stomachic and carminative in indigestion,
for piles and for sore throats.--_n._ CUBEB'IN, a crystallising substance
in cubebs. [Fr. _cubèbe_--Ar. _kab[=a]bah_.]

CUBICA, k[=u]'bi-ka, _n._ a fine worsted for linings.

CUBICLE, k[=u]'bi-kl, _n._ a bedroom.

CUBIT, k[=u]'bit, _n._ a measure employed by the ancients, equal to the
length of the arm from the elbow to the tip of the middle-finger, from 18
to 22 inches--also C[=U]'BITUS.--_adj._ C[=U]'BITAL, of the length of a
cubit. [L. _cubitum_, the elbow; cf. L. _cub[=a]re_, to lie down.]

CUCKING-STOOL, kuk'ing-st[=oo]l, _n._ a stool in which scolds and other
culprits were placed, usually before their own door, to be pelted by the
mob. [Mentioned in Domesday Book as in use in Chester, and called _cathedra
stercoris_. From an obs. word _cuck_, to ease one's self; cf. Ice. _kúka_.]

CUCKOLD, kuk'old, _n._ a man whose wife has proved unfaithful.--_v.t._ to
wrong (a husband) by unchastity.--_v.t._ CUCK'OLDISE, to make a
cuckold.--_adv._ CUCK'OLDLY (_Shak._).--_ns._ CUCK'OLD-MAK'ER; CUCK'OLDOM,
state of a cuckold: act of adultery; CUCK'OLDRY, adultery. [O. Fr.
_cucuault_--_cucu_, cuckoo.]

CUCKOO, kook'k[=oo], _n._ a bird which cries cuckoo, remarkable for laying
its eggs in the nests of other birds.--_ns._ CUCK'OO-BUD (_Shak._), name of
a plant; CUCK'OO-CLOCK, a clock in which the hours are told by a
cuckoo-call; CUCK'OO-FLOW'ER, a species of Cardamine--called also _Lady's
Smock_; CUCK'OO-PINT, the Wake-robin, _Arum maculatum_; CUCK'OO-SPIT,
-SPIT'TLE, a frothy spittle, made by many insects parasitic on plants,
surrounding the larvæ and pupæ.

CUCULLATE, -D, k[=u]'kul-l[=a]t, -ed, _adj._ hooded: shaped like a hood.
[L. _cucullatus_--_cucullus_, a hood.]

CUCUMBER, k[=u]'kum-b[.e]r, _n._ a creeping plant, with heart-shaped
leaves, rough with bristly hairs, and large oblong fruit used as a salad
and pickle--a native of southern Asia.--_adj._ CUCUM'IFORM. [L. _cucumis_,
_cucumeris_.]

CUCURBIT, k[=u]'kur-bit, _n._ a chemical vessel used in distillation,
originally shaped like a gourd.--_adjs._ CUCUR'BITAL, CUCURBIT[=A]'CEOUS,
pertaining to the _Cucurbitaceæ_, mostly herbaceous climbers, as the gourd,
melon, &c.; CUCUR'BITIVE, like a gourd-seed. [Fr. _cucurbite_--L.
_cucurbita_, a gourd.]

CUD, kud, _n._ the food brought from the first stomach of a ruminating
animal back into the mouth and chewed again.--_n._ CUD'WEED, the popular
name for many species of plants covered with a cottony down.--CHEW THE CUD,
to meditate. [A.S. _cwidu_.]

CUDBEAR, kud'b[=a]r, _n._ a purple or violet coloured powder prepared from
a lichen, used in dyeing. [A corr. of _Cuthbert_--from Dr _Cuthbert_
Gordon, who first made it an article of commerce.]

CUDDLE, kud'l, _v.t._ to hug: to embrace: to fondle.--_v.i._ to lie close
and snug together.--_n._ a close embrace. [Perh. a freq. of M. E. _couth_,
cosy.]

CUDDY, kud'i, _n._ a small cabin or cookroom, in the fore-part of a boat or
lighter: in large vessels, the officers' cabin under the poopdeck. [Origin
uncertain; cf. Fr. _cahute_; Dut. _kajuit_; Ger. _kajüte_.]

CUDDY, kud'i, _n._ the right of a lord to entertainment from his tenant:
rent: (_Spens._) _Cuddeehih_. [Corr. of Ir. _cuid oidhche_--_cuid_, a
share, _oidhche_, night.]

CUDDY, CUDDIE, kud'i, _n._ a donkey: (_Scot._) a stupid person. [Perh.
formed from _Cuthbert_.]

CUDGEL, kud'jel, _n._ a heavy staff: a club.--_v.t._ to beat with a
cudgel:--_pr.p._ cud'gelling; _pa.p._ cud'gelled.--_ns._ CUD'GELLER;
CUD'GELLING.--_adj._ CUD'GEL-PROOF, not to be hurt by beating.--TAKE UP THE
CUDGELS, to engage in a contest. [A.S. _cycgel_.]

CUE, k[=u], _n._ the last words of an actor's speech serving as a hint to
the next speaker: any hint: the part one has to play. [Acc. to some from
Fr. _queue_, tail, as the ending words of the last speech; in 17th cent.
written Q, and derived from L. _quando_, 'when,' i.e. when the actor was to
begin.]

CUE, k[=u], _n._ a twist of hair at the back of the head: a rod used in
playing billiards.--_v.t._ of the hair, to form in a cue. [Fr. _queue_--L.
_cauda_, a tail.]

CUFF, kuf, _n._ a stroke with the open hand.--_v.t._ to strike with the
open hand: to beat. [Origin obscure; cf. Sw. _kuffa_, to knock.]

CUFF, kuf, _n._ the end of the sleeve near the wrist: a covering for the
wrist: a handcuff (q.v.). [Prob. cog. with COIF.]

CUFF, kuf, _n._ Scotch form of SCRUFF.--CUFF OF THE NECK. See SCRUFF.

CUFFIN, kuf'in, _n._ a man: a justice of the peace. [Thieves' slang.]

CUFIC, k[=u]f'ik, _adj._ of or pertaining to Cufa, esp. applied to the kind
of writing of the scholars of _Cufa_ in Asiatic Turkey, seat of the most
expert copyists of the Koran.

CUIRASS, kwi-ras', or k[=u]-, _n._ a defensive covering for the breast and
back, of leather or iron fastened with straps and buckles, &c.--_v.t._ to
furnish with such.--_n._ CUIRASSIER', a horse-soldier armed with such. [Fr.
_cuirasse_--_cuir_, leather--L. _corium_, skin leather.]

CUIR-BOUILLI, kw[=e]r-b[=oo]'lyi, _n._ leather softened by boiling, then
dried, retaining the impressions made on it.--Also CUIR-BOUILLY.

CUISINE, kwe-z[=e]n', _n._ a kitchen or cooking department: cookery.--_n._
CUISIN'IER, a cook. [Fr. (It. _cucina_)--L. _coquina_--_coqu[)e]re_, to
cook.]

CUISSE, kwis, CUISH, kwish, _n._ armour for the thighs, consisting of iron
plates laid horizontally over each other and riveted together. [Fr.
_cuisse_ (It. _coscia_, the thigh)--L. _coxa_, the hip.]

CUITER, küt'[.e]r, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to fondle, pamper.

CUITTLE, küt'l, _v.t._ to curry: (_Scot._) to cajole.

CULCH, kulch, _n._ (_prov._) rubbish.

CULDEE, kul'd[=e], _n._ one of a fraternity of monks living in Scotland in
the 8th century in groups of cells. [Acc. to Reeves and Skene, the old Ir.
_céle dé_, 'servants of God,' or 'companions of God'--Latinised by Boece
into _Culdei_, as if _cultores Dei_.]

CUL-DE-FOUR, k[=oo]-de-foor, _n._ (_archit._) a sort of low spherical
vault, oven-like.--_ns._ CUL-DE-LAMPE, an ornamental design used in filling
up blank spaces in a book; CUL-DE-SAC, a street, &c., closed at one end: a
blind alley. [Fr. _cul_, bottom--L. _culus_; Fr. _four_, furnace, _lampe_,
lamp, _sac_, sack.]

CULET, k[=u]'let, _n._ the small flat surface at the back or bottom of a
brilliant: the part of armour protecting the body behind, from the waist
downwards--also CULETTE. [O. Fr., _cul_--L. _culus_, the rump.]

CULEX, k[=u]'leks, _n._ the typical genus of _Culicidæ_ or gnats--_adj._
CULIC'IFORM, gnat-like. [L.]

CULINARY, k[=u]'lin-ar-i, _adj._ pertaining to the kitchen or to cookery:
used in the kitchen. [L. _culinarius_--_culina_, a kitchen.]

CULL, kul, _v.t._ to select, pick out.--_ns._ CULL'ER; CULL'ING. [Fr.
_cueillir_, to gather--L. _collig[)e]re_--_col_, together, _leg[)e]re_, to
gather. Doublet of COLLECT.]

CULLENDER. See COLANDER.

CULLET, kul'et, _n._ refuse glass.

CULLION, kul'yun, _n._ a wretch: a cowardly fellow.--_adj._ CULL'IONLY
(_Shak._), mean, base. [Fr. _couillon_, a poltroon (It. _coglione_)--L.
_coleus_, a leather bag.]

CULLIS, kul'is, _n._ a gutter in a roof: a groove, as for a side-scene in a
theatre. [Fr. _coulisse_.]

CULLY, kul'i, _n._ a mean dupe.--_v.t._ to deceive meanly:--_pa.p._
cull'ied.--_ns._ CULL, a dupe; CULL'YISM, state of being a cully. [Prob. a
contr. of CULLION.]

CULM, kulm, _n._ the stalk or stem of corn or of grasses.--_v.i._ to form a
culm.--_adj._ CULMIF'EROUS, having a culm. [L. _culmus_, a stalk.]

CULM, kulm, _n._ coal-dust: name given in some parts of England to
anthracite or stone-coal.--_adj._ CULMIF'EROUS, producing culm. [See COOM.]

CULMEN, kul'men, _n._ highest point: the median length-wise ridge of a
bird's upper mandible. [L.]

CULMINATE, kul'min-[=a]t, _v.i._ (_astron._) to be vertical or at the
highest point of altitude: to reach the highest point (with _in_).--_adj._
CUL'MINANT, at its highest point.--_n._ CULMIN[=A]'TION, act of
culminating: the top: (_astron._) transit of a body across the meridian or
highest point for the day. [Low L. _culmin[=a]re_, from L. _culmen_,
properly _columen_, a summit.]

CULOTTIC, kul-ot'ic, _adj._ wearing trousers: (_Carlyle_) respectable. [Fr.
_culotte_, breeches.]

CULPABLE, kul'pa-bl, _adj._ faulty: criminal.--_ns._ CULPABIL'ITY,
CUL'PABLENESS, liability to blame.--_adv._ CUL'PABLY.--_adj._ CUL'PATORY,
expressive of blame. [O. Fr. _coupable_--L. _culpabilis_--_culpa_, a
fault.]

CULPRIT, kul'prit, _n._ one in fault: a criminal: (_Eng. law_) a prisoner
accused but not yet tried. [From the fusion in legal phraseology of _cul._
(_culpable_, _culpabilis_), and _prit_, _prist_ (O. Fr. _prest_), ready.
Not _culpate_--law L. _culpatus_, a person accused.]

CULT, kult, _n._ a system of religious belief, worship.--Also CULT'US. [L.
_cultus_--_col[)e]re_, to worship.]

CULTER, kul't[.e]r, _n._ obsolete form of COULTER.--_adjs._ CULTIROS'TRAL,
CULTUROS'TRAL; CUL'TRATE, -D, shaped like a pruning-knife; CUL'TRIFORM, in
the form of a pruning-knife: sharp-edged.

CULTISM, kult'ism, _n._ a style of writing after the manner of Luis de
Góngora y Argote (1561-1627), a Spanish lyric poet--_estilo culto_, being
florid, pedantic, often obscure.--_ns._ CULT'IST, CULT'ORIST. [Sp. _culte_,
elegant--L. _cultus_.]

CULTIVATE, kul'ti-v[=a]t, _v.i._ to till or produce by tillage: to prepare
for crops: to devote attention to: to civilise or refine.--_adjs._
CUL'TIVABLE, CULTIVAT'ABLE, capable of being cultivated.--_ns._
CULTIV[=A]'TION, the art or practice of cultivating: civilisation:
refinement; CUL'TIVATOR.--CULTIVATE A PERSON'S FRIENDSHIP, to endeavour to
get his good-will. [Low L. _cultiv[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--L. _col[)e]re_, to
till, to worship.]

CULTURE, kul't[=u]r, _n._ cultivation: the state of being cultivated:
refinement the result of cultivation.--_v.t._ to cultivate: to
improve.--_adjs._ CUL'TURABLE; CUL'TURAL.--_p.adj._ CUL'TURED, cultivated:
well educated: refined.--_adj._ CUL'TURELESS. [L.
_cult[=u]ra_--_col[)e]re_.]

CULTUS. See CULT.

CULVER, kul'v[.e]r, _n._ a dove: a pigeon.--_n._ CUL'VER-KEY, an herb,
probably the columbine, having key-shaped flowerets.--_adj._ CUL'VERTAILED,
dovetailed. [A.S. _culfre_, prob. from L. _columba_.]

CULVERIN, kul'v[.e]r-in, _n._ one of the earlier forms of cannon of great
length, generally an 18-pounder, weighing 50 cwt.--_ns._ CUL'VERINEER;
DEM'I-CUL'VERIN, a 9-pounder, weighing 30 cwt. [Fr. _coulevrine_, from
_couleuvre_, a serpent.]

CULVER'S PHYSIC, ROOT, _n._ popular name of a kind of speedwell, the
rhizome of _Veronica virginica_, used medicinally. [Prob. from one Dr
_Culver_.]

CULVERT, kul'v[.e]rt, _n._ an arched channel of masonry for carrying water
beneath a road, railway, &c. [Perh. from Fr. _couler_, to flow--L.
_col[=a]re_.]

CULVERTAGE, kul'ver-t[=a]j, _n._ degradation of a vassal to the position of
a serf. [O. Fr. _culvert_, a serf.]

CUMBENT, kum'bent, _adj._ lying down; reclining. [L. _cumbens_, _-entis_,
pr.p. of _cumb[)e]re_, to lie down.]

CUMBER, kum'b[.e]r, _v.t._ to trouble or hinder with something useless: to
retard, trouble.--_n._ encumbrance: cumbering.--_adj._ CUM'BERED, hampered:
obstructed.--_ns._ CUM'BERER; CUM'BER-GROUND, a useless thing, from Luke,
xiii. 7.--_adj._ CUM'BERLESS, unencumbered.--_ns._ CUM'BERMENT, CUM'BRANCE,
encumbrance.--_adjs._ CUM'BERSOME, unwieldy: heavy; CUM'BROUS, hindering:
obstructing: heavy.--_adv._ CUM'BROUSLY.--_n._ CUM'BROUSNESS. [O. Fr.
_combrer_, to hinder--Low L. _cumbrus_, a heap; corr. of L. _cumulus_, a
heap.]

CUMBRIAN, kum'bri-an, _adj._ (_geol._) of or pertaining to a system of
slaty rocks best developed in Cumberland and Westmorland, now merged in the
Cambrian or Silurian system.

CUMIN, CUMMIN, kum'in, _n._ an umbelliferous plant, common in Egypt, and
cultivated in southern Europe and India--its seeds, resembling the caraway,
valuable as carminatives. [L. _cuminum_--Gr. _kyminon_, cog. with Heb.
_kammôn_.]

CUMMER, kum'[.e]r, KIMMER, kim'[.e]r, _n._ a gossip: a woman: (_Scot._) a
girl. [Fr. _commère_--L. _con_, with, _mater_, mother.]

CUMMERBUND, kum'[.e]r-bund, _n._ a waist-belt, a sash. [Anglo-Ind.--Pers.
_kamarband_, a loin-band.]

CUMSHAW, kum'shaw, _n._ a gift, a tip. [Pidgin-English.]

CUMULATE, k[=u]m'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to heap together: to
accumulate.--_adjs._ CUM'ULATE, -D, heaped up.--_n._ CUMUL[=A]'TION (=
_Accumulation_).--_adj._ CUM'ULATIVE, increasing by successive
additions.--_adv._ CUM'ULATIVELY. [L. _cumul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_cumulus_,
a heap.]

CUMULUS, k[=u]'m[=u]-lus, _n._ a heap; a kind of cloud common in summer,
consisting of rounded heaps with a darker horizontal base.--_adjs._
C[=U]'MULIFORM; C[=U]'MULOSE.--_n._ C[=U]'MULO-STR[=A]'TUS, a cloud looking
like a combination of the _cumulus_ and _stratus_. [L. _cumulus_, a heap,
and _stratus_.]

CUNABULA, k[=u]-nab'ul-a, _n.pl._ a cradle. [L.]

CUNARDER, k[=u]n-ard'[.e]r, _n._ one of a certain line of steamships
between England and America. [Founded by Sir Samuel _Cunard_ (1787-1865).]

CUNCTATOR, kungk-t[=a]'tor, _n._ one who delays or puts off.--_n._
CUNCT[=A]'TION, delay.--_adjs._ CUNCT[=A]'TIOUS, CUNCT[=A]'TIVE,
CUNCT[=A]'TORY, inclined to delay. [L.,--_cunct[=a]ri_, to delay.]

CUNEAL, k[=u]'ne-al, CUNEATE, k[=u]'ne-[=a]t, _adj._ of the form of a
wedge.--_adjs._ CUN[=E]'IFORM, C[=U]'NIFORM, wedge-shaped--specially
applied to the old Babylonian and Assyrian writing, of which the characters
have a wedge-shape. [L. _cuneus_, a wedge.]

CUNETTE. See CUVETTE.

CUNNING, kun'ing, _adj._ knowing: skilful: artful: crafty.--_n._ knowledge:
skill: faculty of using stratagem to accomplish a purpose:
artifice.--_adv._ CUNN'INGLY.--_n._ CUNN'INGNESS, quality of being cunning:
artfulness, slyness. [A.S. _cunnan_, to know.]

CUP, kup, _n._ a vessel used to contain liquid: a drinking-vessel: the
liquid contained in a cup: that which we must receive or undergo:
afflictions: blessings.--_v.i._ to extract blood from the body by means of
cupping-glasses: (_Shak._) to make drunk:--_pr.p._ cup'ping; _pa.p._
cupped.--_ns._ CUP'-BEAR'ER, one who attends at a feast to fill out and
hand the wine; CUPBOARD (kub'urd), a place for keeping victuals, dishes,
&c.--_v.t._ to store.--_ns._ CUP'BOARD-LOVE, -FAITH, love or faith indulged
in for a material end; CUP'FUL, as much as fills a cup:--_pl._ CUP'FULS;
CUP'-GALL, a cup-shaped gall in oak-leaves; CUP'-L[=I]'CHEN, or -MOSS, a
species of _Cladonia_; CUP'MAN, a boon companion; CUP'PER, a cup-bearer:
one professionally engaged in cupping; CUP'PING, the application of cups
from which the air has been exhausted to a scarified part of the skin for
the purpose of drawing blood; CUP'PING-GLASS, a glass used in the operation
of cupping; DRY'-CUP'PING, the application of cups without previous
scarification; LOV'ING-CUP, a cup (from which all drink) passed round at
the close of a feast.--CRY CUPBOARD, to cry for food; IN HIS CUPS, under
the influence of liquor; MANY A SLIP BETWEEN THE CUP AND THE LIP, a proverb
signifying that something adverse may occur at the last moment. [A.S.
_cuppe_ (Fr. _coupe_, It. _coppa_, a cup, the head); all from L. _cupa_,
_cuppa_, a tub.]

CUPEL, k[=u]'pel, _n._ a small vessel used by goldsmiths in assaying
precious metals.--_v.t._ to assay in a cupel.--_n._ CUPELL[=A]'TION, the
process of assaying precious metals. [L. _cupella_, dim. of _cupa_. See
CUP.]

CUPIDITY, k[=u]-pid'i-ti, _n._ covetousness.--_n._ C[=U]'PID, the god of
love. [L. _cupiditas_--_cup[)e]re_, to desire.]

CUPOLA, k[=u]'po-la, _n._ a spherical vault, or concave ceiling, on the top
of a building: the internal part of a dome: a dome.--_v.t._ to furnish with
such. [It.; dim. of Low L. _cupa_, a cup--L. _cupa_, a tub.]

CUPREOUS, k[=u]p'r[=e]-us, CUPRIC, k[=u]p'rik, _adj._ of or containing
copper.--_adj._ CUPRIF'EROUS, producing copper.--_n._ C[=U]'PRITE, the red
oxide of copper. [L. _cuprum_, copper, _ferre_, to bear.]

CUPRESSUS, k[=u]-pres'us, _n._ the cypress genus of coniferous trees. [L.]

CUPULE, k[=u]'p[=u]l, _n._ (_bot._) a shortened axis with a number of more
or less cohering bracts enclosing the ripening fruit--also
C[=U]'PULA.--_adj._ CUPULIF'EROUS, bearing cupules. [L. _cupula_, dim. of
_cupa_, a tub, and _ferre_, to carry.]

CUR, kur, _n._ a worthless dog, of low breed: a churlish fellow.--_adj._
CUR'RISH.--_adv._ CUR'RISHLY.--_n._ CUR'RISHNESS. [M. E. _curre_; cf. Old
Dut. _korre_, Dan. _kurre_, to whir.]

CURAÇOA, koo-ra-s[=o]'a, _n._ a liqueur so named from the island of
_Curaçao_ in the West Indies, where it was first made.--Also CURAÇA'O.

CURARI, koo-rä'ri, _n._ a poison used by South American Indians for their
arrows--also CURA'RA.--_n._ CURA'RINE, a highly poisonous alkaloid
extracted from curari. [From the native name.]

CURASSOW, k[=u]-ras'[=o], _n._ a large turkey-like South American bird.

CURATE, k[=u]r'[=a]t, _n._ one who has the cure of souls: an inferior
clergyman in the Church of England, assisting a rector or vicar.--_ns._
CUR'ACY, CUR'ATESHIP, the office, employment, or benefice of a curate. [Low
L. _curatus_, from L. _cura_, care.]

CURATOR, k[=u]r-[=a]'tor, _n._ one who has the charge of anything: a
superintendent: one appointed by law as guardian: a member of a board for
electing university professors and the like:--_fem._ CUR[=A]'TRIX.--_n._
CUR[=A]'TORSHIP, the office of a curator. [L. _curator_, an
overseer--_cur[=a]re_, to cure.]

CURB, kurb, _v.t._ to bend to one's will: to subdue: to restrain or check:
to furnish with or guide by a curb.--_n._ that which curbs: a check or
hinderance: a chain or strap attached to the bit of a bridle for
restraining the horse.--_adjs._ CURB'ABLE; CURB'LESS.--_ns._ CURB'-ROOF, a
roof whose upper rafters have a less inclination than the lower ones;
CURB'STONE, KERB'STONE, a stone placed edgeways against earth or stone work
to check it. [Fr. _courber_, from L. _curvus_, crooked, bent.]

CURCH, kurch, _n._ a covering for the head, a kerchief.

CURCULIO, kur-k[=u]'li-o, _n._ the fruit-weevil. [L.]

CURCUMA, kur'k[=u]-ma, _n._ a genus of plants yielding turmeric.--_n._
CUR'CUMINE, the colouring matter of turmeric. [Fr.,--Ar. _kurkum_,
saffron.]

CURD, kurd, _n._ milk thickened or coagulated: the cheese part of milk, as
distinguished from the whey.--_n._ CURD'INESS.--_v.i._ CURD'LE, to turn
into curd: to congeal: to thicken.--_v.t._ to congeal.--_adj._ CURD'Y, like
or full of curd. [Prob. Celt.; Gael. _gruth_, Ir. _cruth_.]

CURE, k[=u]r, _n._ care of souls or spiritual charge: care of the sick: act
of healing: that which heals: a remedy, or course of remedial
treatment.--_v.t._ to heal: to preserve, as by drying, salting,
&c.:--_pr.p._ c[=u]r'ing; _pa.p._ c[=u]red.--_adj._ CUR'ABLE, that may be
cured.--_ns._ CUR'ABLENESS, CURABIL'ITY, quality of being curable;
CURE'-ALL, a panacea.--_adjs._ CUR'ATIVE, CUR'ATORY, tending to cure;
CURE'LESS, that cannot be cured.--_ns._ CUR'ER, one who cures: a physician;
CUR'ING-HOUSE, a house or place in which anything is cured, esp. a building
in which sugar is drained, as in the West Indies. [O. Fr. _cure_---L.
_cura_, care; not the same as CARE.]

CURÉ, k[=u]'r[=a], _n._ a parish priest in France.

CURFEW, kur'f[=u], _n._ in feudal times the ringing of a bell at eight
o'clock, as a signal to put out all fires and lights. [O. Fr. _covrefeu_;
_couvrir_, to cover, _feu_, fire--L. _focus_.]

CURIA, k[=u]'ri-a, _n._ one of the ten divisions of a Roman tribe: a
building in which the senate met, a provincial senate: a court, legislative
or judicial: the court of the papal see.--_ns._ C[=U]'RIALISM;
C[=U]'RIALIST.--_adj._ CURIALIST'IC. [L.]

CURIET, k[=u]'ri-et, _n._ (_Spens._) a cuirass.

CURIO, k[=u]'ri-o, _n._ any article of virtu or bric-à-brac, or anything
considered rare and curious.--_n._ CURI[=O]'SO, a collector or admirer of
curios.

CURIOUS, k[=u]'ri-us, _adj._ anxious to learn: inquisitive: showing great
care or nicety: skilfully made: singular: rare.--_n._ CURIOS'ITY, state or
quality of being curious: inquisitiveness: that which is curious: anything
rare or unusual.--_adv._ C[=U]'RIOUSLY.--_n._ C[=U]'RIOUSNESS.--CURIOUS
ARTS (_B._), magical practices. [Fr. _curieux_--L. _curiosus_--_cura_.]

[Illustration]

CURL, kurl, _v.t._ to twist into ringlets: to coil.--_v.i._ to shrink into
ringlets: to rise in undulations: to writhe: to ripple: to play at the game
of curling.--_n._ a ringlet of hair, or what is like it: a wave, bending,
or twist.--_adjs._ CURLED; CURLED'-PATE (_Shak_.), having curled
hair.--_ns._ CURL'ER, one who, or that which, curls: a player at the game
of curling; CURL'ICUE, a fantastic curl; CURL'IEWURLIE (_Scot._), any
fantastic round ornament; CURL'INESS; CURL'ING, a game, common in Scotland,
consisting in hurling heavy smooth stones along a sheet of ice.--_ns.pl._
CURL'ING [=I]'RONS, CURL'ING-TONGS, an iron instrument used for curling the
hair.--_n._ CURL'ING-STONE, a heavy stone with a handle, used in
curling.--_adjs._ CURL'Y, having curls: full of curls; CURL'Y-HEAD'ED. [M.
E. _crull_; Dut. _krullen_, Dan. _krolle_, to curl.]

CURLEW, kur'l[=u], _n._ one of the wading-birds, having a very long slender
bill and legs, and a short tail. [O. Fr. _corlieu_; prob. from its cry.]

CURMUDGEON, kur-muj'un, _n._ an avaricious, ill-natured fellow: a
miser.--_adj._ CURMUD'GEONLY. [Earlier _corn-mudgin_; _mudge_, _mooch_; M.
E. _muchen_--O. Fr. _mucier_, to hide.]

CURMURRING, kur-mur'ing, _n._ a rumbling sound, esp. that made in the
bowels by flatulence. [Imit.]

CURR, kur, _v.i._ to cry like an owl, to purr like a cat, &c. [Imit.]

CURRACH, -AGH, kur'ach, _n._ a coracle. [Gael.]

CURRANT, kur'ant, _n._ a small kind of raisin or dried grape imported from
the Levant: the fruit of several species of ribes.--_ns._ CURR'ANT-JELL'Y;
CURR'ANT-WINE. [From _Corinth_.]

CURRENT, kur'ent, _adj._ running or flowing: passing from person to person:
generally received: now passing: present.--_n._ a running or flowing: a
stream: a portion of water or air moving in a certain direction:
course.--_n._ CURR'ENCY, circulation: that which circulates, as the money
of a country: general estimation.--_adv._ CURR'ENTLY.--_n._ CURR'ENTNESS,
state of being current: general acceptance.--PASS CURRENT, to be received
as genuine. [L. _currens_, _-ent-is_--_curr[)e]re_), to run.]

CURRICLE, kur-i'kl, _n._ a two-wheeled open chaise, drawn by two horses
abreast: a chariot.--_n._ CURRIC'ULUM, a course, esp. the course of study
at a university. [L. _curriculum_, from _curr[)e]re_.]

CURRISH, CURRISHLY, &c. See CUR.

CURRY, kur'i, _n._ a kind of sauce or seasoning much used in India,
compounded of pepper, ginger, and other spices: a stew mixed with
curry-powder.--_n._ CURR'Y-POW'DER. [Tamil _kari_, sauce.]

CURRY, kur'i, _v.t._ to dress leather: to rub down and dress a horse: to
beat: to scratch:--_pr.p._ curr'ying; _pa.p._ curr'ied.--_ns._ CURR'IER,
one who curries or dresses tanned leather; CURR'Y-COMB, an iron instrument
or comb used for currying or cleaning horses; CURR'YING.--CURRY FAVOUR
(corruption of CURRY FAVELL, to curry the chestnut horse), to seek favour
by flattery. [O. Fr. _correier_ (mod. _corroyer_), _conrei_, outfit, from a
supposed Low L. form _conred[=a]re_, _con-_, with, _r[=e]d[=a]re_, seen in
Array.]

CURRY, CURRIE, obsolete forms of QUARRY.

CURSE, kurs, _v.t._ to invoke or wish evil upon: to devote to perdition: to
vex or torment.--_v.i._ to utter imprecations: to swear.--_n._ the
invocation or wishing of evil or harm upon: evil invoked on another:
torment: any great evil.--_adj._ CURS'ED, under a curse: blasted by a
curse: hateful.--_adv._ CURS'EDLY.--_ns._ CURS'EDNESS; CURS'ER;
CURS'ING.--_adj._ CURST, cursed: deserving a curse: ill-tempered: shrewish:
froward.--_n._ CURST'NESS, state of being curst: peevishness: frowardness.
[A.S. _cursian_--_curs_, a curse; ety. dub.; not conn. with Cross.]

CURSITOR, kur'si-tor, _n._ a clerk or officer in the Court of Chancery who
makes out original writs. [Low L. _cursitor_, from the words '_de cursu_,'
applied in the statute to ordinary writs.]

CURSIVE, kur'siv, _adj._ written with a running hand, of handwriting:
flowing.--_adv._ CUR'SIVELY. [Low L. _cursivus_--L. _curr[)e]re_, to run.]

CURSORIAL, kur-s[=o]'ri-al, _adj._ adapted for running.--_n.pl._
CURS[=O]'RES, an order of birds variously limited.

CURSORY, kur'sor-i, _adj._ hasty: superficial: careless.--_adj._ CUR'SORARY
(_Shak._), cursory.--_adv._ CUR'SORILY.--_n._ CUR'SORINESS. [L.
_curr[)e]re_, _cursum_, to run.]

CURST. See CURSE.

CURSUS, kur'sus, _n._ a race-course: a form of daily prayer or service; an
academic curriculum. [L.]

CURT, kurt, _adj._ short: concise: discourteously brief or summary.--_adj._
CURT'[=A]TE, shortened or reduced; applied to the distance of a planet from
the sun or earth reduced to the plane of the ecliptic.--_n._
CURT[=A]'TION.--_adv._ CURT'LY.--_n._ CURT'NESS. [L. _curtus_, shortened.]

CURTAIL, kur-t[=a]l', _v.t._ to cut short: to cut off a part: to
abridge:--_pr.p._ curtail'ing; _pa.p._ curtailed'.--_ns._ CURTAIL'MENT;
CURTAIL'-STEP, the rounded step at the bottom of a stair. [Old spelling
_curtal_, O. Fr. _courtault_ (It. _cortaldo_)--L. _curtus_.]

CURTAIN, kur'tin, _n._ drapery hung round and enclosing a bed, &c.: the
part of a rampart between two bastions.--_v.t._ to enclose or furnish with
curtains.--_n._ CUR'TAIN-LEC'TURE, a lecture or reproof given in bed by a
wife to her husband.--BEHIND THE CURTAIN, away from public view; DRAW THE
CURTAIN, to draw it aside, so as to show what is behind, or in front of
anything so as to hide it. [O. Fr. _cortine_--Low L. _cortina_; prob. L.
_cors_, _cortis_, a court.]

CURTAL, kur'tal, _n._ a horse with a curt or docked tail: anything docked
or cut short.--_adj._ docked or shortened.--_n._ CUR'TAL-FR[=I]'AR
(_Scott_), a friar with a short frock. [Fr. _courtaud_--_court_. See
CURTAIL.]

CURTAL-AX, kur'tal-aks, CURT-AXE, kurt'aks, _n._ (_Spens._), a short, broad
sword. [A corr. of the earlier forms _coutelas_, _curtelas_. See CUTLASS.]

CURTILAGE, kur'til-[=a]j, _n._ a court attached to a dwelling-house. [O.
Fr. _courtillage_. See COURT.]

CURTSY, CURTSEY, kurt'si, _n._ an obeisance, made by bending the knees,
proper to women and children.--_v.i._ to make a curtsy. [See COURTESY.]

CURULE, k[=u]'r[=oo]l, _adj._ applied to a chair in which the higher Roman
magistrates had a right to sit. [L. _curulis_--_currus_, a chariot.]

CURVE, kurv, _n._ anything bent: a bent or curved line: an arch.--_v.t._ to
bend: to form into a curve.--_adjs._ CUR'V[=A]TE, -D, curved or bent in a
regular form.--_n._ CURV[=A]'TION.--_adj._ CUR'VATIVE.--_n._ CUR'VATURE, a
curving or bending: the continual bending or the amount of bending from a
straight line.--_adjs._ CURVED; CUR'VICAUDATE, having a crooked tail;
CURVICOS'TATE, having curved ribs; CURVIF[=O]'LIATE, having curved leaves;
CUR'VIFORM; CUR'VING; CURVIROS'TRAL, with the bill curved downward;
CUR'VITAL, of or pertaining to curvature.--_n._ CUR'VITY, the state of
being curved. [L. _curvus_, crooked.]

CURVET, kur'vet, kur-vet', _n._ a light leap of a horse in which he raises
his forelegs together, next the hindlegs with a spring before the forelegs
touch the ground: a leap, frolic.--_v.i._ (kur-vet', kur'vet) to leap in
curvets: to frisk:--_pr.p._ curvet'ting, curvet'ing; _pa.p._ cur'veted.
[It. _corvetta_, dim. of _corvo_--L. _curvus_.]

CURVILINEAR, kur-vi-lin'i-ar, CURVILINEAL, kur-vi-lin'i-al, _adj._ bounded
by curved lines.--_n._ CURVILINEAR'ITY. [L. _curvus_, and
_linearis_--_linea_, a line.]

CUSCUS, kus'kus, _n._ the grain of the African millet. Same as COUSCOUS.
[Fr. _couscou_.]

CUSCUS, kus'kus, _n._ the fibrous root of an Indian grass, used for making
fans, &c. [Pers. _khas khas_.]

CUSHAT, koosh'at, _n._ the ringdove or wood-pigeon. [A.S. _cúscute_, the
former part of dub. origin, the latter derived from _scéotan_, to shoot.]

CUSHION, koosh'un, _n._ a case filled with some soft, elastic stuff, for
resting on: a pillow: the 'pillow' used in making bone-lace: an engraver's
pad: the rubber of an electrical machine: a pad supporting a woman's hair:
the elastic lining of the inner side of a billiard-table: a body of steam
remaining in the cylinder of a steam-engine, acting as a buffer to the
piston.--_v.t._ to seat on or furnish with a cushion.--_p.adj._ CUSH'IONED,
furnished with a cushion, padded: having cushion-tires.--_ns._ CUSH'IONET,
a little cushion; CUSH'ION-TIRE, a bicycle tire made of india-rubber
tubing, with india-rubber stuffing.--_adj._ CUSH'IONY, like a cushion,
soft. [O. Fr. _coissin_--L. _coxinum_, _coxa_, hip.]

CUSK, kusk, _n._ the torsk: the burbot.

CUSP, kusp, _n._ a point: the point or horn of the moon, &c.: (_archit._) a
small projecting ornament common in Gothic tracery.--_adjs._ CUS'PID[=A]TE,
-D (_bot._), having a sharp end, as the canine teeth. [L. _cuspis_,
_cuspid-is_, a point.]

CUSPIDOR, kus'pi-dor, _n._ a spittoon.--Also CUS'PIDORE. [Port.,--L.
_conspu[)e]re_, to spit upon.]

CUSS, kus, _n._ (_slang_) a fellow: an expletive.--_adj._ CUSS'ED,
cursed.--_n._ CUSS'EDNESS, contrariness. [Obviously CURSE; prob. in the
personal sense with a supposed reference to CUSTOMER.]

CUSTARD, kus'tard, _n._ a composition of milk, eggs, &c., sweetened and
flavoured.--_ns._ CUS'TARD-APP'LE, the fruit of a West Indian tree, having
an eatable pulp, like a custard; CUS'TARD-COFF'IN (_Shak._), the paste or
crust which covers a custard. [Earlier _custade_, a corr. of _crustade_, a
pie with crust. See CRUST.]

CUSTODY, kus'to-di, _n._ a watching or guarding: care: security:
imprisonment.--_adj._ CUST[=O]'DIAL.--_ns._ CUST[=O]'DIAN, CUS'TODE,
CUST[=O]'DIER, CUS'TOS, one who has care, esp. of some public building. [L.
_custodia_, from _custos_, _custodis_, a keeper.]

CUSTOM, kus'tum, _n._ what one is wont to do: usage: frequent repetition of
the same act: regular trade or business: a tax on goods: (_pl._) duties
imposed on imports and exports.--_adj._ CUS'TOMABLE, customary:
common.--_adv._ CUS'TOMARILY.--_n._ CUS'TOMARINESS.--_adjs._ CUS'TOMARY,
according to use and wont: holding or held by custom; CUS'TOMED,
accustomed: usual.--_ns._ CUS'TOMER, one accustomed to frequent a certain
place of business: a buyer: (_slang_) a person; CUS'TOM-HOUSE, the place
where customs or duties on exports and imports are collected.--_adj._
CUS'TOM-SHRUNK (_Shak._), having fewer customers than formerly. [O. Fr.
_custume_, _costume_--L. _consuetud-inem_, _consuesc[)e]re_, to accustom.]

CUSTREL, kus'tr[.e]l, _n._ attendant on a knight: a villain. [O. Fr.
_coustillier_, _coustille_, a dagger.]

CUT, kut, _v.t._ to make an incision in: to cleave or pass through: to
divide: to carve, hew, or fashion by cutting: to wound or hurt: to affect
deeply: to shorten: to break off acquaintance with, to pass intentionally
without saluting: to renounce, give up: to castrate: to perform or execute,
as 'to cut a caper.'--_v.i._ to make an incision: to pass, go quickly:
(_slang_) to run away, to be off: to twiddle the feet rapidly in
dancing:--_pr.p._ cut'ting; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ cut.--_n._ a cleaving or
dividing: a stroke or blow: an act of unkindness: the card obtained by
cutting or dividing the pack: an incision or wound: a piece cut off: an
engraved block, or the picture from it: manner of cutting, or, fashion:
(_pl._) a lot.--_n._ CUT'AWAY', a coat with the skirt cut away in a curve
in front--also _adj._--_ns._ CUT'-OFF, that which cuts off or shortens, a
straighter road, a shorter channel cut by a river across a bend: a
contrivance for saving steam by regulating its admission to the cylinder;
CUT'PURSE (_Shak._), one who stole by [Illustration] cutting off and
carrying away purses (the purses being worn at the girdle): a pickpocket;
CUT'TER, the person or thing that cuts: in a tailor's shop, the one who
measures and cuts out the cloth: a small vessel with one mast, a mainsail,
a forestaysail, and a jib set to bowsprit-end, any sloop of narrow beam and
deep draught; CUT'-THROAT, an assassin: ruffian; CUT'TING, a dividing or
lopping off: an incision: a piece cut off: a paragraph from a newspaper: a
piece of road or railway excavated: a twig; CUT'-WA'TER, the fore-part of a
ship's prow.--CUT A DASH, or FIGURE, to make a conspicuous appearance;
CUT-AND-COME-AGAIN, abundant supply, from the notion of cutting a slice,
and returning at will for another; CUT-AND-COVER, a method of forming a
tunnel by cutting out, arching it over, and then covering in; CUT-AND-DRY,
or CUT-AND-DRIED, ready made, without the merit of freshness--from the
state of herbs in the shop instead of the field; CUT AND RUN, to be off
quickly; CUT DOWN, to take down the body of one hanged by cutting the rope:
to reduce, curtail; CUT IN, to strike into, as to a conversation, a game at
whist; CUT IT TOO FAT, to overdo a thing; CUT OFF, to destroy, put to an
untimely death: intercept: stop; CUT OFF WITH A SHILLING, to disinherit,
bequeathing only a shilling; CUT ONE'S STICK, to take one's departure; CUT
OUT, to shape: contrive: debar: supplant: to take a ship out of a harbour,
&c., by getting between her and the shore; CUT SHORT, to abridge: check;
CUT THE COAT ACCORDING TO THE CLOTH, to adapt one's self to circumstances;
CUT THE TEETH, to have the teeth grow through the gums--of an infant; CUT
THE THROAT OF (_fig._), to destroy utterly; CUT UP, to carve: eradicate:
criticise severely: turn out (well or ill) when divided into parts; CUT UP
ROUGH, to become quarrelsome.--A CUT ABOVE (_coll._), a degree or stage
above; SHORT CUT, or NEAR CUT, a short way. [Prob. W. _cwtau_, shorten.]

CUTANEOUS. See CUTIS.

CUTCH, kuch, _n._ the commercial name for catechu, from the Indian name
_kut_.

CUTCHERRY, kuch'[.e]r-i, _n._ an office for public business, a
court-house.--Also CUTCH'ERY. [Hind.]

CUTE, k[=u]t, _adj._ an aphetic form of ACUTE.

CUTHBERT, kuth'bert, _n._ the apostle of Northumbria (635-687), whose name
lives in (ST) CUTHBERT'S BEADS, a popular name for the perforated joints of
encrinites found on Holy Island; (ST) CUTHBERT'S DUCK, the eider-duck.

CUTIKINS, k[=oo]'ti-kinz, _n.pl._ (_Scot._) spatterdashes--also CUITIKINS.

CUTIS, k[=u]'tis, _n._ the skin: the true skin, as distinguished from the
cuticle.--_adj._ CUT[=A]N'EOUS, belonging to the skin.--_n._ C[=U]'TICLE,
the outermost or thin skin.--_adj._ CUTIC'ULAR, belonging to the cuticle.
[L.]

CUTLASS, kut'las, _n._ a short, broad sword, with one cutting edge, used in
the navy. [Fr. _coutelas_, augmentative of _couteau_, knife, from L.
_cultellus_, dim. of _culter_, a ploughshare, a knife.]

CUTLER, kut'l[.e]r, _n._ one who makes or sells knives.--_n._ CUT'LERY, the
business of a cutler: edged or cutting instruments in general. [Fr.
_coutelier_, _coutel_, knife.]

CUTLET, kut'let, _n._ a slice of meat cut off for cooking, esp. of mutton
or veal--generally the rib and the meat belonging to it. [Fr. _côtelette_,
dim. of _côte_, from L. _costa_, a rib.]

CUTTLE, kut'l, _n._ a kind of mollusc, remarkable for its power of ejecting
a black inky liquid--also CUTT'LE-FISH.--_n._ CUTT'LE-BONE, the internal
shell or bone of the cuttle-fish, used for making tooth-powder and for
polishing the softer metals. [A.S. _cudele_.]

CUTTO, CUTTOE, kut'o, _n._ a large knife.

CUTTY, kut'i, _adj._ (_Scot._) short, curtailed.--_n._ a short clay pipe: a
short, dumpy girl: applied to a woman, a term of reprobation, serious or
playful.--_n._ CUTT'Y-STOOL, the stool of repentance in old Scotch church
discipline. [CUT.]

CUVETTE, küv-et', _n._ a trench sunk along the middle of a dry ditch or
moat.--Also CUNETTE'. [Fr.]

CYANOGEN, s[=i]-an'o-jen, _n._ a compound of carbon, obtained by
decomposing the cyanide of mercury by heat, so called from being an
essential ingredient in the formation of Prussian blue.--_n._ CY'ANATE, a
salt of cyanic acid.--_adj._ CYAN'IC, of or belonging to cyanogen.--_ns._
CY'ANIDE, a direct compound of cyanogen with a metal; CY'ANINE, the blue
colouring matter of violets, &c.; CY'ANITE, a mineral composed of alumina
and silica, generally sky-blue; CYANOM'ETER, an instrument for measuring
the degrees of blueness of the sky or ocean; CYAN[=O]'SIS, morbid lividness
of the skin, blue jaundice.--_adj._ CYANOT'IC.--_ns._ CYAN'OTYPE, a
photograph on paper sensitised by a cyanide; CYAN'URET, a cyanide.--CYANIC
ACID, an acid composed of cyanogen and oxygen. [Gr. _kyanos_, blue.]

CYAR, s[=i]'ar, _n._ the internal auditory meatus.

CYATHIFORM, s[=i]'a-thi-form, _adj._ like a cup a little widened at top.

CYCAD, s[=i]'kad, _n._ an order allied to _Coniferæ_, but in appearance
rather resembling ferns and palms.--_adj._ CYCAD[=A]'CEOUS. [Formed from
Gr. _kykas_, an erroneous form of _koikas_, _koiks_, the doom-palm.]

CYCLAMEN, sik'lä-men, _n._ a genus of _Primulaceæ_, native to southern
Europe. [Formed from Gr. _kyklamis_, _-inos_.]

CYCLE, s[=i]'kl, _n._ a period of time in which events happen in a certain
order, and which constantly repeats itself: an imaginary circle or orbit in
the heavens: a series of poems, prose romances, &c., centring round a
figure or event--also CY'CLUS: an abbreviation for bicycle and
tricycle.--_v.i._ to move in cycles: to ride or take exercise on a bicycle
or tricycle.--_adjs._ CY'CLIC, -AL, pertaining to or containing a
cycle.--_ns._ CY'CLIST, for bicyclist or tricyclist; CY'CLOGRAPH, an
instrument for describing the arcs of circles that have too large a
curvature for compasses; CY'CLOID, a figure like a circle: a curve made by
a point in a circle, when the circle is rolled along a straight
line.--_adj._ CYCLOID'AL.--_ns._ CYCLOID'IAN, one of the fourth order of
fishes, according to the classification of Agassiz, having cycloid scales
with smooth edges, as the salmon; CYCLOM'ETER, an instrument for measuring
circular arcs: an apparatus attached to the wheel of a cycle for
registering the distance traversed; CY'CLORN, a cycle-horn. [Gr. _kyklos_,
a circle.]

CYCLONE, s[=i]'kl[=o]n, _n._ a circular or rotatory storm.--_adj._
CYCLON'IC. [Coined from Gr. _kykl[=o]n_, pr.p. of _kykloein_, to whirl
round--_kyklos_.]

CYCLOPÆDIA, CYCLOPEDIA, s[=i]-kl[=o]-p[=e]'di-a, _n._ the circle or compass
of human knowledge: a work containing information on every department, or
on a particular department, of knowledge, usually arranged
alphabetically.--_adjs._ CYCLOPÆ'DIC, CYCLOPE'DIC. [Gr. _kyklos_, a circle,
and _paideia_, learning.]

CYCLOPS, s[=i]'klops, _n._ one of a fabled race of giants who lived chiefly
in Sicily, with one eye in the middle of the forehead: a genus of minute
freshwater copepods with an eye in front:--_pl._ CYCL[=O]'PES.--_adjs._
CYCLOP[=E]'AN, CYCLOP'IC, relating to or like the Cyclops: giant-like:
vast: pertaining to a prehistoric style of masonry with immense stones of
irregular form. [Gr. _kykl[=o]ps_--_kyklos_, a circle, and _[=o]ps_, an
eye.]

CYCLORAMA, s[=i]-klo-rä'ma, _n._ a circular panorama painted on the inside
of a cylindrical surface appearing in natural perspective. [Formed from Gr.
_kyklos_, circle, _horama_, view.]

CYCLOSIS, s[=i]-kl[=o]'sis, _n._ circulation, as of blood.

CYCLYOLOSTOMOUS, s[=i]-klos't[=o]-mus, _adj._ round-mouthed, as a lamprey.

CYCLOSTYLE, s[=i]'klo-st[=i]l, _n._ an apparatus for multiplying copies of
a writing. [Formed from Gr. _kyklos_, circle, and STYLE.]

CYDER. Same as CIDER.

CYGNET, sig'net, _n._ a young swan. [Acc. to Diez, a dim. of Fr. _cygne_,
whose old form _cisne_ (Sp. _cisne_, a swan) is from Low L. _cecinus_, not
conn. with L. _cygnus_, Gr. _kyknos_, a swan.]

CYLINDER, sil'in-d[.e]r, _n._ a solid circular or roller-like body, whose
ends are equal parallel circles: (_mech._) applied to many cylindrical
parts of machines, as any rotating cylindrical portion of a
printing-press.--_adjs._ CYLINDR[=A]'CEOUS, somewhat cylindrical;
CYLIN'DRIC, -AL, having the form or properties of a cylinder.--_n._
CYLINDRIC'ITY.--_adj._ CYLIN'DRIFORM, in the form of a cylinder.--_n._
CYL'INDROID, a body like a cylinder, but having its base elliptical. [Gr.
_kylindros_, _kylindein_, to roll.]

CYMA, s[=i]'ma, _n._ a moulding of the cornice, an ogee.--_ns._ CYM'AGRAPH,
an instrument for tracing the outline of mouldings; CYM[=A]'TIUM, a cyma.
[Gr. _kyma_, a billow.]

CYMAR, si-mär', _n._ a loose light dress worn by ladies. [See CHIMER.]

CYMBAL, sim'bal, _n._ a hollow brass, basin-like, musical instrument,
beaten together in pairs.--_ns._ CYM'BALIST, a cymbal-player; CYM'BALO, the
dulcimer.--_adj._ CYM'BIFORM, boat-shaped. [L. _cymbalum_--Gr.
_kymbanon_--_kymb[=e]_, the hollow of a vessel.]

CYME, s[=i]m, _n._ a young shoot: (_bot._) term applied to all forms of
inflorescence which are definite or centrifugal.--_adjs._ CYM'OID, CYM'OSE,
CYM'OUS. [L. _cyma_--Gr. _kyma_, a sprout.]

CYMOPHANE, s[=i]'m[=o]-f[=a]n, _n._ chrysoberyl.--_adj._ CYMOPH'ANOUS,
opalescent. [Formed from Gr. _kyma_, wave, _phainein_, to show.]

CYMRIC, kim'rik, _adj._ Welsh.--_n._ CYM'RY, the Welsh, [W. _Cymru_,
Wales.]

CYNANCHE, si-nang'k[=e], _n._ a name of various diseases of the throat or
windpipe, esp. quinsy. [Gr., _ky[=o]n_, a dog, _anchein_, to throttle.]

CYNIC, -AL, sin'ik, -al, _adj._ dog-like: surly: snarling: austere;
misanthropic.--_ns._ CYNAN'THROPY, lycanthropy; CYN'IC, one of a sect of
philosophers founded by Antisthenes of Athens (born c. 444 B.C.),
characterised by an ostentatious contempt for riches, arts, science, and
amusements--so called from their morose manners: a morose man: a snarler;
CYN'ICISM, surliness: contempt for human nature: heartlessness,
misanthropy.--_adv._ CYN'ICALLY.--_n._ CYN'ICALNESS. [Gr. _kynikos_,
dog-like--_ky[=o]n_, _kynos_, a dog; cf. L. _can-is_.]

CYNOCEPHALUS, s[=i]-no-sef'al-us, _n._ the dog-faced baboon: a race of men
with dogs' heads. [Gr. _ky[=o]n_, _kynos_, dog, _kephal[=e]_, head.]

CYNOSURE, sin'o-sh[=oo]r, or s[=i]', _n._ the dog's tail, a constellation
(_Ursa minor_) containing the north-star; hence anything that strongly
attracts attention or admiration. [Gr. _ky[=o]n_, _kynos_, a dog, _oura_, a
tail.]

CYPERUS, sip-[=e]'rus, _n._ a tropical genus of _Cyperaceæ_.--_adj._
CYPER[=A]'CEOUS, belonging to, or like, sedge plants. [From Gr. _kypeiros_,
sedge.]

CYPHER. Same as CIPHER.

CY PRES, s[=e] pr[=a], in the law of charitable trusts in England, the
principle of applying the money to some object _as near as possible_ to the
one specified, when this has become impracticable. [O. Fr.]

CYPRESS, s[=i]'pres, _n._ an evergreen tree whose branches used to be
carried at funerals; hence a symbol of death.--_adj._ CYP'RINE. [O. Fr.
_ciprès_ (Fr. _cyprès_)--L. _cupressus_--Gr. _kyparissos_.]

CYPRIAN, sip'ri-an, _adj._ belonging to the island of _Cyprus_: lewd,
licentious--Cyprus being the place where Venus was worshipped.--_n._ a
native of Cyprus--also CYP'RIOT: a lewd woman.

CYPRUS, s[=i]'prus, _n._ a thin, transparent, black stuff, a kind of
crape.--_n._ CY'PRUS-LAWN (_Milt._). [Prob. named from the island of
_Cyprus_.]

CYRENAIC, s[=i]-rin-[=a]'ik, _adj._ pertaining to _Cyrene_, or to the
hedonism of its philosopher Aristippus, a pupil of Socrates.

CYRILLIC, sir-il'ik, _adj._ pertaining to the alphabet attributed to St
_Cyril_ (9th cent.), distinguished from the other Slavonic alphabet, the
Glagolitic.

CYST, sist, _n._ a bag in animal bodies containing morbid matter.--_adjs._
CYST'IC, CYST'IFORM, CYSTOID', having the form of, or contained in, a cyst
or bag.--_ns._ CYS'TICLE, a small cyst; CYST[=I]'TIS, inflammation of the
bladder; CYS'TOCELE, a hernia formed by the protrusion of the bladder;
CYST[=O]'MA, a tumour containing cysts; CYSTOT'OMY, the operation of
cutting into the bladder to remove extraneous matter. [Low L. _cystis_--Gr.
_kystis_, a bladder.]

CYTHEREAN, sith-e-r[=e]'an, _adj._ pertaining to Venus. [L.
_Cythereus_--_Cythera_, an island in the Ægean Sea (now _Cerigo_),
celebrated for the worship of Venus.]

CYTISUS, sit'i-sus, _n._ a group of hardy leguminous shrubby plants, with
yellow, white, or purple flowers, chiefly in the warmer temperate parts of
the Old World. [Gr. _kytisos_.]

CYTOBLAST, s[=i]'to-blast, _n._ the nucleus or germinal spot of a cellule,
from which the organic cell is developed.--_n._ CYTOGEN'ESIS,
cell-formation. [Gr. _kytos_, a vessel, _blastanein_, to bud.]

CZAR, TSAR, tsär, or zär, _n._ the emperor of Russia:--_fem._ CZARI'NA,
TSARI'NA.--_ns._ CZAR'EVITCH, TSAR-, a son of a czar.--CESAR'EVITCH is the
title of the eldest son, and CESAREV'NA, of his wife.--_ns._ CZAREV'NA,
TSAREV'NA, a daughter of a czar. [Russ. _tsari_, a king; conn. with Ger.
_kaiser_, ult. from L. _cæsar_, a king or emperor.]

CZARDAS, zär'das (Hung. pron. chär'dosh), _n._ a Hungarian national dance,
consisting of two sections--a slow movement called a _lassu_ or _lassan_,
and a quick step, the _friss_ or _friska_.

CZECH, tshek, _n._ a member of the most westerly branch of the Slavic
family of races, the term including the Bohemians, or Czechs proper, the
Moravians, and the Slovaks: the language of the Czechs, Bohemian, closely
allied to Polish.--_adj._, also CZECH'IC.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]

the fourth letter in our alphabet, as well as in the Phoenician, Hebrew,
Greek, and Latin, from which last it was immediately derived--its sound the
soft dental mute: (_mus._) the second note in the natural scale.

DAB, dab, _v.t._ to strike gently with something soft or moist, to
smear:--_pr.p._ dab'bing; _pa.p._ dabbed.--_n._ a gentle blow: a small lump
of anything soft or moist: a species of flounder of light-brown colour,
with small dark spots and rough, close-set scales.--_ns._ DAB'BER, a sort
of pad for dabbing ink on engraved wood blocks or plates; DAB'CHICK, a
small water-fowl, a kind of grebe. [First about 1300; cf. Old Dut.
_dabben_, to pinch; Ger. _tappe_, a pat. Confused with DAUB and TAP.]

DAB, dab, _n._ an expert person.--_n._ DAB'STER (_coll._). [Prob. a corr.
of ADEPT.]

DABBLE, dab'l, _v.t._ to spatter with moisture.--_v.i._ to play in water
with hands or feet: to do anything in a trifling way.--_n._ DABB'LER, one
who does things superficially.--_adv._ DABB'LINGLY. [Freq. of DAB.]

DA CAPO, dä kä'p[=o], a term in music, frequently placed at the end of a
movement, indicating that the performer must return to the beginning of the
music--usually written _D.C._ [It., 'from the beginning'--L. _de_, from,
_caput_, head.]

DACE, d[=a]s, DARE, d[=a]r, DART, därt, _n._ a small river fish of the carp
family, and of the same genus as the roach, chub, minnow, &c. [M. E.
_darce_--O. Fr. _dars_--Low L. _dardus_, a dart or javelin--of Teut.
origin. So called from its quickness.]

DACHSHUND, daks'hoond, _n._ a badger-dog. [Ger. _dachs_, a badger, _hund_,
dog.]

DACKER, dak'[.e]r, DAKER, d[=a]'k[.e]r, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to lounge,
saunter.--Also DAIK'ER.

DACOIT, da-koit', _n._ one of a gang of robbers in India and Burma--also
DAKOIT'.--_ns._ DACOIT'Y, DACOIT'AGE, robbery by gang-robbers, brigandage.
[Hind. _d[=a]k[=a][=i]t_, a robber.]

DACRYOMA, dak-ri-[=o]'ma, _n._ stoppage of the tear duct. [Formed from Gr.
_dakry_, a tear.]

DACTYL, dak'til, _n._ in Latin and Greek poetry, a foot of three syllables,
one long followed by two short, so called from its likeness to the joints
of a finger; in English, a foot of three syllables, with the first
accented, as _mer_'rily, _vi_'olate.--_adjs._ DAC'TYLAR, DACTYL'IC,
relating to or consisting chiefly of dactyls.--_ns._ DACTYL'IOMANCY,
divination by means of a finger-ring; DAC'TYLIST; DACTYLOG'RAPHY, the
science of finger-rings; DACTYLOL'OGY, the art of talking with the fingers,
like the deaf and dumb. [L. _dactylus_--Gr. _daktylos_, a finger.]

DAD, dad, DADDY, dad'i, _n._ father, a word used by children.--_n._
DADD'Y-LONG-LEGS, the crane-fly, a familiar insect with long body, legs,
and antennæ. [Prob. Celt., W. _tad_, Bret, _tad_, _tat_; cf. Gr. _tata_.]

DAD, dad, _v.t._ to throw against something: to dash.--_n._ a lump: a
piece: a blow. [Der. unknown.]

DADDLE, dad'l, _v.i._ to walk in an unsteady manner, as a child or very old
person: to totter:--_pr.p._ dadd'ling; _pa.p._ dadd'led. [Perh. conn. with
DAWDLE.]

DADDLE, dad'l, _n._ (_slang_) the hand.

DADDOCK, dad'ok, _n._ (_prov._) the heart of a rotten tree.

DADO, d[=a]'do, _n._ in classical architecture, the cubic block forming the
body of a pedestal: a skirting of wood along the lower part of the walls of
a room, often represented merely by wall-paper, painting, &c. [It.,--L.
_datus_ (_talus_, a die, being understood), given or thrown
forth--_d[=a]re_, to give.]

DÆDAL, d[=e]'dal, DÆDALIAN, de-d[=a]'li-an, _adj._ formed with art:
displaying artistic skill: intricate. [From L. _Dædalus_, Gr. _Daidalos_,
the mythical artist who constructed the Cretan labyrinth.]

DÆMON, d[=e]'mon, _n._ a spirit holding a middle place between gods and
men, like the dæmon or good genius of Socrates.--_adj._ DÆ'MONIC,
supernatural: of power or intelligence more than human. [L. _dæmon_--Gr.
_daim[=o]n_, a spirit, a genius, and later a devil. See DEMON.]

DAFF, daf, _v.i._ to play, to play the fool.--_n._ DAFF'ING (_Scot._),
foolery, gaiety. [M. E. _daf_, deaf, prob. Ice. _dawfr_ (Sw. _döf_, Dan.
_döv_), deaf.]

DAFF, daf, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to put off. [A variant of DOFF.]

DAFFODIL, daf'o-dil, DAFFODILLY, daf'o-dil-i, DAFFODOWNDILLY,
daf'o-down-dil'i, _n._ a yellow flower of the lily tribe--also called
_King's spear_. [M. E. _affodille_--O. Fr. _asphodile_--Gr. _asphodelus_;
the _d_ is prefixed accidentally.]

DAFT, daft, _adj._ (_Scot._) silly, weak-minded, insane, unreasonably
merry.--_adv._ DAFT'LY.--_n._ DAFT'NESS. [See DAFF.]

DAG, dag, _n._ a dagger: a hand-gun or heavy pistol, used in the 15th and
16th centuries.--Also DAGGE. [Fr. _dague_; Celt.; cf. Bret. _dag_.]

DAGGER, dag'[.e]r, _n._ a short sword for stabbing at close quarters:
(_print._) a mark of reference ([Dagger]), the double dagger ([Double
Dagger]) being another.--AT DAGGERS DRAWN, in a state of hostility; LOOK
DAGGERS, to look in a hostile manner. [M. E. _dagger_--W. _dagr_ (Ir.
_daigear_); cf. Fr. _dague_.]

DAGGLE, dag'l, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to wet or grow wet by dragging on the wet
ground.--_n._ DAGG'LE-TAIL, a slattern.--_adj._ slatternly. [Freq. of prov.
Eng. _dag_, to sprinkle, from a Scand. root seen in Sw. _dagg_.]

DAGO, d[=a]'go, _n._ (_U.S._) a name applied loosely to Spanish- and
Italian-born men. [Prob. a corr. of Sp. _Diego_--L. _Jacobus_.]

DAGOBA, dag'o-ba, _n._ in Ceylon, a dome-like structure of solid masonry,
containing relics of a Buddhist saint. [Singh. _d[=a]gaba_.]

DAGON, d[=a]'gon, _n._ the national god of the Philistines, half-man,
half-fish. [Heb. _d[=a]g[=o]n_--_dag_, fish.]

DAGUERREOTYPE, da-ger'o-t[=i]p, _n._ a method of taking pictures on metal
plates by the light of the sun: a photograph fixed on a plate of copper by
a certain process.--_adj._ DAGUER'R[=E]AN.--_n._ DAGUERR[=E]'OTYPY, the art
of daguerreotyping. [Fr., from Louis _Daguerre_ (1789-1851).]

DAGWOOD. See DOGWOOD.

DAHABEEAH, da-ha-b[=e]'a, _n._ a Nile-boat with oars, one or two masts, and
lateen sails.--Also DAHABI'EH, DAHABI'YEH. [Ar. _dahab[=i]ya_.]

DAHLIA, d[=a]l'i-a, _n._ a genus of garden plants with large flowers. [From
_Dahl_, a Swedish botanist.]

DAIDLE, d[=a]'dl, _v.i._ a Scotch form of _daddle_: also to
draggle.--_adj._ DAID'LING, feeble: dawdling.

DAIKER, d[=a]'ker, _v.i._ (_prov._) to deck out.

DAILY, d[=a]'li, _adj._ and _adv._ every day.--_n._ a daily paper.

DAIMIO, d[=i]'myo, _n._ a Japanese territorial noble under the old feudal
system. [Jap.]

DAINTY, d[=a]n'ti, _adj._ pleasant to the palate: delicate: fastidious:
(_Spens._) elegant.--_n._ that which is dainty, a delicacy.--_adj._ DAINT
(_Spens._).--_adv._ DAIN'TILY.--_n._ DAIN'TINESS. [M. E. _deintee_,
anything worthy or costly. O. Fr. _daintié_, worthiness--L.
_dignitat-em_--_dignus_, worthy.]

DAIRY, d[=a]'ri, _n._ the place where milk is kept, and butter and cheese
made: an establishment for the supply of milk.--_ns._ DAI'RY-FARM;
DAI'RYING; DAI'RYMAID; DAI'RYMAN. [M. E. _deye_.--Ice. _deigja_, a
dairymaid; orig. a kneader of dough.]

DAIS, d[=a]'is, _n._ a raised floor at the upper end of the dining-hall
where the high table stood: a raised floor with a seat and canopy: the
canopy over an altar, &c. [O. Fr. _dais_--Low L. _discus_, a table--L.
_discus_, a quoit--Gr. _diskos_, a disc.]

DAISY, d[=a]'zi, _n._ a common wild-flower, growing in pastures and
meadows--the name given also to other plants, as the _Ox-eye daisy_, which
is a chrysanthemum.--_adj._ DAI'SIED, covered with daisies.--_n._
DAI'SY-CUT'TER, a fast-going horse that does not lift its feet high: a
cricket-ball skimmed along the ground. [A. S. _dæges eáge_, day's eye, the
sun.]

DAK, däk, DAWK, dawk, _n._ in India, the mail-post: travelling in
palanquins carried by relays of bearers. [Hind. _d[=a]k_, a relay of men.]

DAKOIT. See DACOIT.

DALAI-LAMA. See LAMA.

DALE, d[=a]l, DELL, del, _n._ the low ground between hills: the valley
through which a river flows.--_n._ DALES'MAN, specifically, an inhabitant
of the dales of the Lake District. [Ice. _dalr_, Sw. _dal_; Ger. _thal_.]

DALI, dä'li, _n._ a timber-tree of Guiana, its wood used for staves, &c.

DALILA. See DELILAH.

DALL, dal, _n._ a tile with incised surface: (_pl._) rapids.

DALLOP, dal'op, _n._ (_prov._), a tuft of grass.

DALLY, dal'i, _v.i._ to lose time by idleness or trifling: to play: to
exchange caresses:--_pa.p._ dall'ied.--_ns._ DALL'IANCE, dallying, toying,
or trifling: interchange of embraces: delay; DALL'IER, a trifler. [M. E.
_dalien_, to play; prob. from A.S. _dweligan_, to err; cf. Ice. _dvala_, to
delay, Dut. _dwalen_, to err; prob. conn. with _dwell_.]

DALMAHOY, dal'ma-hoi, _n._ a bushy bob-wig, worn in the 18th cent. by
chemists, &c.

DALMATIAN, dal-m[=a]'shun, _adj._ belonging to _Dalmatia_, a strip of
Austrian territory along the Adriatic.--DALMATIAN DOG, the spotted
coach-dog, resembling the pointer in shape.

DALMATIC, dal-mat'ik, _n._ a loose-fitting, wide-sleeved ecclesiastical
vestment, worn specially by deacons in the R.C. Church, also sometimes by
bishops. [Low L. _dalmatica_, a robe worn by persons of rank in the early
Christian centuries, on the pattern of a dress worn in _Dalmatia_.]

DALT, dält, _n._ (_Scot._) a foster-child. [Gael. _dalta_.]

DALTONISM, dal'ton-izm, _n._ colour-blindness: inability to distinguish
certain colours.--_adj._ DALT[=O]'NIAN. [So called from the chemist John
_Dalton_ (1766-1844), who had this infirmity.]

DAM, dam, _n._ an embankment to restrain water: the water thus
confined.--_v.t._ to keep back water by a bank:--_pr.p._ dam'ming; _pa.p._
dammed. [Teut.; Dut. _dam_, Ger. _damm_, &c.]

DAM, dam, _n._ a mother, applied to quadrupeds. [A form of _dame_.]

DAMAGE, dam'[=a]j, _n._ hurt, injury, loss: the value of what is lost:
(_coll._) cost: (_pl._) the pecuniary reparation due for loss or injury
sustained by one person through the fault or negligence of another.--_v.t._
to harm.--_v.i._ to take injury.--_adj._ DAM'AGEABLE. [O. Fr. _damage_ (Fr.
_dommage_)--L. _damnum_, loss.]

DAMAN, dam'an, _n._ the Syrian hyrax, the cony of the Bible. [Syrian.]

DAMAR. Same as DAMMAR.

DAMASCENE, da'mas-[=e]n, _adj._ of _Damascus_.--_v.t._ same as DAMASKEEN.

DAMASK, dam'ask, _n._ figured stuff, originally of silk, now of linen,
cotton, or wool, the figure being woven, not printed.--_v.t._ to flower or
variegate, as cloth.--_adj._ of a red colour, like that of a damask
rose.--_v.t._ DAMASKEEN', to decorate metal (esp. steel) by inlaying or
encrusting on it patterns like damask in other metals: to ornament with
flowery patterns, to damask.--_ns._ DAMASKEEN'ING, DAMASCEEN'ING, the
watered or striated structure seen in certain sword-blades and other
weapons: the ornamental incrustation with gold and silver of steel and iron
surfaces; DAMASKIN', a Damascus blade: a damaskeened blade; DAM'ASK-PLUM,
the damson; DAM'ASK-ROSE, a species of pink-rose; DAM'ASK-STEEL, Damascus
steel; DAM'ASSIN, damask with flowered patterns in gold or silver
thread.--DAMASCUS BLADE, a Damascus sword, the surface marked by wavy and
variegating lines. [From _Damascus_, in Syria, where damask was orig.
made.]

DAMBOARD, dam'b[=o]rd, DAMBROD, dam'brod, _n._ (_Scot._) a draughtboard,
the pieces being _dams_. [Fr. _jeu de dames_, copied by the Germans as
_damenspiel_, by the Swedes as _damspel_, &c., perhaps from the movement of
the pieces being like those of the queen (_reine_ or _dame_) in chess.]

DAME, d[=a]m, _n._ the mistress of a house: a matron: a noble lady.--_ns._
DAME'-SCHOOL, a school for children kept by a woman; DAME'S'-V[=I]'OLET, a
genus of cruciferous plants, formerly cultivated by ladies in pots for its
sweet scent at night. [Fr. _dame_--L. _domina_, a mistress, fem. of
_dominus_, a master.]

DAMMAR, dam'mar, _n._ a resin, used for making varnish, obtained from a
genus of East Indian conifers.

DAMN, dam, _v.t._ to censure or condemn: to sentence to eternal punishment:
to doom.--_n._ an oath: a curse.--_adj._ DAM'NABLE, deserving or tending to
damnation: hateful: pernicious.--_n._ DAM'NABLENESS.--_adv._
DAM'NABLY.--_n._ DAMN[=A]'TION, condemnation: (_theol._) the punishment of
the impenitent in the future state: eternal punishment.--_adj._ DAM'NATORY,
consigning to damnation.--_p.adj._ DAMNED, sentenced to everlasting
punishment: hateful: a profane intensive, meaning merely thorough (often
written d----d, and softened into _darned_, _dashed_, &c.).--_adv._ very,
exceedingly.--_adj._ DAMNIF'IC.--_n._ DAMNIFIC[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ DAM'NIFY,
to cause loss to.--_adj._ DAM'NING, exposing to condemnation. [Fr.
_damner_--L. _damn[=a]re_, to condemn--_damnum_, loss.]

DAMOCLEAN, dam-[=o]-cl[=e]'an, _adj._ like _Damocles_, flatterer of
Dionysius of Syracuse, taught the insecurity of happiness by being made to
sit through the feast with a sword suspended by a single hair over his
head.

DAMOSEL, dam'o-sel, _n._ Same as DAMSEL.

DAMP, damp, _n._ vapour, mist: moist air: lowness of spirits: (_pl._)
dangerous vapours in mines, &c.--_v.t._ to wet slightly: to chill: to
discourage: to check: to make dull.--_adj._ moist, foggy: sometimes in the
form DAMP'Y.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ DAMP'EN, to make or become damp or
moist.--_n._ DAMP'ER, that which checks or moderates: a mechanical
appliance for reducing currents, musical vibration, &c.: (_Australia_) a
kind of unfermented bread.--_adj._ DAMP'ISH, somewhat damp.--_n._
DAMP'ISHNESS.--_adv._ DAMP'LY.--_n._ DAMP'NESS.--DAMPING OFF (_hort._), the
death of plants from excess of moisture. [M. E. _dampen_; akin to Dut.
_damp_, Ger. _dampf_, vapour.]

DAMSEL, dam'zel, _n._ a young unmarried woman: a girl. [O. Fr. _damoisele_
(Fr. _demoiselle_), a page--Low L. _domicellus_, dim. of L. _dominus_, a
lord.]

DAMSON, dam'zn, _n._ a rather small oval fruited variety of the common
plum, esteemed for preserving. [Shortened from _Damascene_--_Damascus_.]

DAN, dan, _n._ a title of honour equivalent to Master or Sir. [O. Fr.
_dan_. (Sp. _don_; Port. _dom_)--L. _dominus_, lord. See DAME.]

DAN, dan, _n._ (_prov._) a box for carrying coal: a tub.

DANAKIL, dan'a-kil, _n._ the name given to the numerous nomad and fisher
tribes on the coast of North-east Africa. [Ar.]

DANCE, dans, _v.i._ to move with measured steps to music: to
spring.--_v.t._ to make to dance or jump.--_n._ the movement of one or more
persons with measured steps to music: the tune to which dancing is
performed.--_ns._ DANCE'-M[=U]'SIC, music specially arranged for
accompanying dancing; DANC'ER, one who practises dancing; DANC'ING, the act
or art of moving in the dance; DANC'ING-GIRL, a professional dancer;
DANC'ING-MAS'TER, a teacher of dancing.--DANCE A BEAR (_obs._), to exhibit
a performing bear; DANCE ATTENDANCE, to wait obsequiously; DANCE OF DEATH,
a series of allegorical paintings symbolising the universal power of death,
represented as a skeleton; DANCE UPON NOTHING, to be hanged.--LEAD A PERSON
A DANCE, to set him on an undertaking under false hopes: to delude.--MERRY
DANCERS, the aurora. [O. Fr. _danser_, from Teut.; Old High Ger. _danson_,
to draw along.]

DANCETTE, dan-set', _n._ (_her._) a zigzag or indented line or figure: the
chevron or zigzag moulding common in Romanesque architecture--also _adj._
[O. Fr. _dent_, _dant_, tooth, notch--L. _dens_.]

DANDELION, dan-de-l[=i]'un, _n._ a common plant with a yellow flower, its
leaves with jagged tooth-like edges. [Fr. _dent de lion_, tooth of the
lion.]

DANDER, dan'd[.e]r, DAUNDER, dawn'd[.e]r, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to walk
leisurely or idly. [Akin to _dandle_.]

DANDER, _n._ a form of DANDRUFF (_vulg._), anger: passion.--RAISE A
PERSON'S DANDER, to put him in a temper.

DANDER, _n._ (_Scot._) furnace cinders. [Ety. dub.]

DANDLE, dan'dl, _v.t._ to play with: to fondle or toss in the arms, as a
baby. [Prob. Teut.; cf. Ger. _tändeln_--_tand_, a toy.]

DANDRIFF, dand'rif, DANDRUFF, dand'ruf, _n._ a scaly scurf which forms on
the surface of the skin under the hair and beard. [Perh. from W. _ton_,
surface, skin, and _drwg_, bad (Skeat).]

DANDY, dan'di, _n._ a foppish, silly fellow: one who pays much attention to
dress.--_v.t._ DAN'DIFY, to dress up as a dandy.--_adv._ DAN'DILY, like a
dandy.--_ns._ DAN'DY-BRUSH, a hard brush of whalebone bristles;
DAN'DY-COCK, a bantam; DAN'DY-F[=E]'VER (see DENGUE); DAN'DY-HORSE, a
velocipede.--_adj._ DAN'DYISH.--_n._ DAN'DYISM. [Perh. from Fr. _dandin_, a
ninny; and prob. from root of _dandle_.]

DANDY, dan'di, _n._ a sloop-like vessel having a jigger-mast abaft.--_n._
DANDY-RIGGED CUTTER.

DANDYPRAT, dan'di-prat, _n._ a dwarf: an urchin. [Ety. dub.]

DANE, d[=a]n, _n._ a native of _Denmark_.--_adj._ DAN'ISH, belonging to
Denmark.--_n._ the language of the Danes--(_Spens._) DANISK.

DANEGELD, d[=a]n'geld, _n._ a tax imposed in the 10th cent., to buy off the
Danes or to defend the country against them. [A.S. _Dene_, Danes, _geid_, a
payment.]

DANG, dang, _v.t._ a minced form of _damn_.

DANGER, d[=a]n'j[.e]r, _n._ peril, hazard, or risk: insecurity: (_obs._)
power.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to endanger.--_adj._ DAN'GEROUS, full of danger:
unsafe: insecure.--_adv._ DAN'GEROUSLY.--_ns._ DAN'GEROUSNESS;
DAN'GER-SIG'NAL. [O. Fr. _dangier_, absolute power (of a feudal lord),
hence power to hurt.--Low L. _dominium_, feudal authority--L. _dominus_, a
lord. See DUNGEON.]

DANGLE, dang'gl, _v.t._ to hang loosely or with a swinging motion: to
follow any one about.--_v.t._ to make to dangle.--_n._ DAN'GLER, one who
dangles about others, esp. about women. [Scand., Dan. _dangle_, to dangle;
cf. Ice. _dingla_, to swing; Sw. _danka_, to saunter.]

DANIEL, dan'yel, _n._ in phrase A SECOND DANIEL, a wise judge, with
reference to the interposition of the wise young Daniel to save Susannah,
in one of the Apocryphal additions to the book of Daniel.

DANITE, dan'[=i]t, _n._ one of a secret society amongst the early Mormons.
[In allusion to Gen. xlix. 16, 17.]

DANK, dangk, _adj._ moist, wet.--_n._ (_Milt._) water.--_adj._ DANK'ISH,
somewhat dank or damp. [Perh. conn. with _dew_. See also DAGGLE.]

DANNEBROG, d[=a]n'e-brog, _n._ the second of the Danish orders instituted
by King Waldemar in 1219. [Dan., 'the Danish banner.']

DANSEUSE, dong-süz', _n._ a female dancer: a ballet dancer. [Fr.]

DANSKER, dan'sk[.e]r, _n._ (_Shak._) a Dane.

DANTEAN, dan'te-an, DANTESQUE, dan'tesk, _adj._ like the poet _Dante_:
sublime: austere.--_ns._ DAN'TIST, a Dante scholar; DANTOPH'ILIST, a lover
of Dante.

DANTON, dan'ton, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to subdue, to daunt. [A form of _daunt_.]

DANUBIAN, dan-[=u]'bi-an, _adj._ pertaining to or bordering on the
_Danube_.--DANUBIAN PRINCIPALITIES, a name applied to Moldavia and
Wallachia.

DAP, dap, _v.i._ to drop the bait gently into the water.

DAPHNE, daf'n[=e], _n._ a genus of shrubs or small trees. [Gr.]

DAPPER, dap'[.e]r, _adj._ quick: little and active: neat: spruce.--_n._
DAPP'ERLING, a dapper little fellow. [Dut. _dapper_, brave; cf. Ger.
_tapfer_, quick, brave.]

DAPPLE, dap'l, _adj._ marked with spots.--_v.t._ to variegate with
spots.--_adjs._ DAPP'ERLY (_Scot._), variegated; DAPP'LE-BAY, of bay
colour, variegated with dapples; DAPP'LED; DAPP'LE-GRAY. [See DIMPLE.]

DARBIES, där'biz, _n.pl._ (_slang_) handcuffs. [App. from the personal name
_Darby_.]

DARBYITES, där'bi-[=i]ts, _n.pl._ a name given to the Plymouth Brethren.
[From their principal founder, J. N. _Darby_ (1800-82).]

DARE, d[=a]r, _v.i._ to be bold enough: to venture:--_pa.t._ durst.--_v.t._
to challenge: to defy.--_n._ (_Shak._) boldness, a challenge.--_n._
DARE'-DEV'IL, a rash, venturesome fellow.--_adj._ unreasonably rash and
reckless.--_adjs._ DARE'FUL (_Shak._), full of daring, adventurous;
DAR'ING, bold: courageous: fearless.--_n._ boldness.--_n._ DAR'ING-DO (see
DERRING-DOE).--_adj._ DAR'ING-HARD'Y (_Shak._), foolhardy.--_adv._
DAR'INGLY.--I DARE SAY, I suppose. [A.S. _durran_, pres. _dearr_; Goth.
_daursan_; akin to Gr. _tharsein_.]

DARE, d[=a]r, _v.t._ to frighten, terrify. [M. E. _daren_, to be in fear;
cf. Dan. _dirre_, to tremble.]

DARE, d[=a]r. Same as DACE.

DARG, darg, _n._ a day's work: (_Scot._) a task. [Contr. from _dawerk_,
_day-wark_, day-work.]

DARIC, dar'ik, _n._ an old gold coin larger than an English sovereign,
named after _Darius_ I. of Persia.

DARK, därk, _adj._ without light: black, or somewhat black: gloomy:
difficult to understand: unenlightened: secret: sinister.--_n._ absence of
light: obscurity: a state of ignorance.--_adv._ (_Shak._) in a state of
dark.--_v.t._ DARK'EN, to make dark: to render ignorant: to sully.--_v.i._
to grow dark or darker.--_n._ DARK'-HOUSE (_Shak._), a mad-house.--_adj._
DARK'ISH, somewhat dark: dusky.--_v.i._ DARK'LE, to grow dark.--_adv._ and
_adj._ DARK'LING, dark: in the dark.--_advs._ DARK'LINGS (_poet._), in the
dark; DARK'LY.--_n._ DARK'NESS.--_adj._ DARK'SOME, dark: (_poet._)
gloomy.--_ns._ DARK'Y, DARK'EY, a negro: (_slang_) a policeman's
lantern.--DARK AGES, the period of intellectual darkness in Europe, from
the 5th to the 15th century.--DARKEN THE DOOR, to enter in at the door.--A
DARK HORSE, in racing, a horse whose capabilities are not known: a
candidate about whom it is not known till the last moment that he is a
candidate.--KEEP DARK, to be silent or secret; KEEP IT DARK, to
conceal.--THE PRINCE OF DARKNESS, Satan. [A.S. _deorc_.]

DARLING, där'ling, _n._ a little dear: one dearly beloved: a favourite.
[_Dear_, and dim. suff. _-ling_ = _l-ing_.]

DARN, därn, _v.t._ to mend a hole by imitating the texture of the
stuff.--_n._ the place darned.--_n._ DARN'ING-NEEDLE. [W. _darn_, a piece,
a patch.]

DARN, därn, _v.i._ a minced form of _damn_.

DARNEL, där'nel, _n._ an annual of the rye-grass genus, the tares of
Scripture. [Prob. conn. with O. Fr. _darne_, stupid, from its supposed
narcotic properties.]

DARRAIGN, DARRAIN. See DERAIN.

DART, därt, _n._ a pointed weapon for throwing with the hand: anything that
pierces.--_v.t._ to hurl suddenly: to send or shoot forth.--_v.i._ to start
or shoot forth rapidly--freq. DAR'TLE.--_adv._ DART'INGLY. [O. Fr. _dart_;
from a Low Ger. root.]

DART. See DACE.

DARTER, därt'[.e]r, _n._ a genus of birds nearly allied to cormorants,
heron-like in gait and gesture.

DARTRE, där'tr, _n._ herpes.--_adj._ DAR'TROUS. [Fr.]

DARWINISM, där'win-ism, _n._ the theory of the origin of species propounded
by C. _Darwin_ (1809-82).--_adjs._ DARWIN'IAN, DARWIN'ICAL.

DASH, dash, _v.t._ to throw violently: to break by throwing together: to
throw water suddenly: to bespatter: to destroy or frustrate: to mix or
adulterate.--_v.i._ to strike against: to break against, as water: to rush
with violence.--_n._ a violent striking: a rushing or violent onset: a
blow: a mark (--) at a break in a sentence: ostentation: a slight
admixture.--_ns._ DASH'-BOARD, a board or leathern frame in front of a
carriage, to keep off splashes of mud; DASH'ER, one who dashes: (_coll._)
one who makes a great show.--_adj._ DASH'ING, rushing: reckless: hasty and
rash: gallant.--_adv._ DASH'INGLY.--_ns._ DASH'-POT, a device for
preventing too sudden motion in some part of an apparatus; DASH'-WHEEL, a
wheel-shaped box with compartments, in which cotton cloth is washed by the
revolution of the wheel in liquid.--DASH OFF, to sketch hastily; DASH OUT,
to knock out by striking against something. [M. E. _daschen_, _dassen_, to
rush, or strike with violence--Scand.; cf. Dan. _daske_, to slap].

DASTARD, das'tard, _n._ a cowardly fellow.--_adj._ shrinking from danger:
cowardly.--_adj._ and _adv._ DAS'TARDLY.--_ns._ DAS'TARDNESS,
DAS'TARDLINESS, DAS'TARDY. [From a Scand. stem _dast_ = Eng. _dazed_, and
Fr. suffix _-ard_. See DAZE.]

DASYMETER, da-sim'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for testing the density of
gases. [Gr. _dasys_, thick, _metron_, measure.]

DASYPUS, das'i-pus, _n._ a genus of armadillos.

DASYURE, das'i-y[=oo]r, _n._ a small carnivorous quadruped of Australia and
Tasmania. [Formed from Gr. _dasys_, hairy, _oura_, tail.]

DATA, d[=a]'ta, _n.pl._ facts given or admitted from which other facts may
be deduced:--_sing._ D[=A]'TUM. [L. _datum_, _data_, given--_d[)a]re_, to
give.]

DATARY, d[=a]'ta-ri, _n._ an officer in the papal chancery, who dates and
despatches documents, grants, &c.--_n._ DAT[=A]'RIA, the office of such.
[Low L. _datarius_--L. _datum_--_d[)a]re_, to give.]

DATE, d[=a]t, _n._ the time of any event: a stipulated time: age, period of
time.--_v.t._ to affix the date to.--_v.t._ to reckon: to begin.--_adj._
DATE'LESS, without date: without fixed limit: undatable.--OUT OF DATE,
antiquated; UP TO DATE, adapted or corrected to the present time: modern.
[O. Fr. _date_--L. _datum_, as in _datum Romæ_ = given or written at Rome.]

DATE, d[=a]t, _n._ the fruit of the date-palm.--_ns._ DATE'-PALM,
DATE'-TREE, the tree on which it grows, a native of the northern half of
Africa and the south-west of Asia; DATE'-PLUM; DATE'-SUG'AR. [Fr.
_datte_--L. _dactylus_--Gr. _daktylos_, a finger.]

DATIVE, d[=a]t'iv, _adj._ that is given or appointed.--_n._ the dative
case, the oblique case of nouns, &c.--generally indicated in English by
_to_ or _for_. [L. _dativus_.]

DATOLITE, dat'[=o]-l[=i]t, _n._ a vitreous calcium borosilicate.

DATUM, d[=a]'tum (see DATA).--_n._ D[=A]'TUM-LINE, the horizontal base-line
from which heights and depths are measured.

DATURA, d[=a]-t[=u]'ra, _n._ a genus of plants, of which one, _D.
stramonium_, or thorn-apple, has strongly narcotic properties.--_n._
DAT'URINE, a poisonous alkaloid in the foregoing. [Hind. _dhat[=u]r[=a]_.]

DAUB, dawb, _v.t._ to smear: to paint coarsely.--_n._ a coarse
painting.--_ns._ DAUB'ER, one who daubs: a coarse painter; DAUB'ERY,
DAUB'RY (_Shak._), a daubing, or crudely artful device; DAUB'ING.--_adj._
DAUB'Y, sticky. [O. Fr. _dauber_, to plaster--L. _dealb[=a]re_, to
whitewash--_de_, down, and _albus_, white.]

DAUD, daud, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to knock, thump.--_n._ a lump: large
piece.--Also DAWD.

DAUGHTER, daw't[.e]r, _n._ a female child: a female descendant: woman
(generally).--_ns._ DAUGH'TER-IN-LAW, a son's wife; DAUGH'TERLINESS;
DAUGH'TERLING, a little daughter.--_adj._ DAUGH'TERLY, like or becoming a
daughter. [A.S. _dohtor_; Scot. _dochter_, Ger. _tochter_, Gr.
_thygat[=e]r_.]

DAUNDER, DAUNER. Same as DANDER.

DAUNT, dänt, or dawnt, _v.t._ to frighten: to discourage: to
subdue.--_adj._ DAUNT'LESS, not to be daunted.--_adv._ DAUNT'LESSLY.--_n._
DAUNT'LESSNESS.--_v.t._ DAUN'TON, to subdue: to dare. [O. Fr. _danter_ (Fr.
_dompter_)--L. _domit[=a]re_--_dom[=a]re_, to tame.]

DAUPHIN, daw'fin, _n._ the name given to the eldest son of the king of
France, from 1349 down to 1830:--_fem._ DAU'PHINESS. [O. Fr. _daulphin_
(Fr. _dauphin_)--L. _delphinus_, a dolphin. From the dolphins in the crest
of Viennois.]

DAUR, dawr, a Scotch form of _dare_.

DAUTIE. See DAWTIE.

DAUW, daw, _n._ the South African name of Burchell's zebra.

DAVENPORT, d[=a]'ven-port, _n._ a small ornamental writing-desk. [From the
maker.]

DAVENPORT-TRICK, d[=a]'ven-port-trik, _n._ the artifice by which a man can
free himself from ropes wound round him and tied.

[Illustration]

DAVIT, d[=a]v'it, _n._ one of a pair of pieces of timber or iron,
projecting over a ship's side or stern, having tackle to raise a boat by.
[Cf. Fr. _davier_, a forceps.]

DAVY, d[=a]'vi, DAVY-LAMP, d[=a]'vi-lamp, _n._ the safety-lamp for
coal-miners of Sir Humphry _Davy_ (1778-1829).

DAVY JONES, d[=a]'vi j[=o]nz, _n._ a sailor's familiar name for the
(malignant) spirit of the sea, the devil; hence DAVY JONES'S LOCKER, of the
sea, as the grave of men drowned at sea. [Said by some to be a compound of
_Duffy_, a West Indian spirit name, and _Jonah_.]

DAW, daw, _v.i._ an old English form of _dawn_.

DAW, daw, _n._ a bird of the crow kind: a jackdaw.--_adj._ DAW'ISH. [From
its cry.]

DAWDLE, daw'dl, _v.i._ to waste time by trifling: to act or move
slowly.--_n._ DAW'DLER. [Allied to _dandle_ and _dandy_.]

DAWK. See DAK.

DAWN, dawn, _v.i._ to become day: to begin to grow light: to begin to
appear.--_n._ daybreak: beginning.--Also DAWN'ING. [A.S. _dagian_, to dawn,
_dæg_, day.]

DAWNERING = dandering. [See DANDER (1).]

DAWTIE, daw'ti, _n._ (_Scot._) a darling: a beloved child--also
DAUT'IE.--_v.t._ DAUT, to fondle.

DAY, d[=a], _n._ the time of light, from sunrise to sunset: the time from
morning till night: twenty-four hours, the time the earth takes to make a
revolution on her axis--this being the _solar_ or _natural_ day as
distinguished from the _sidereal_ day, between two transits of the same
star: a man's period of existence or influence: a time or period.--_ns._
DAY'-BED (_Shak._), a couch or sofa; DAY'-BLIND'NESS, a defect of vision,
in which objects are best seen by a dim light; DAY'-BOOK, a book in which
merchants, &c., enter the transactions of every day; DAY'BREAK; DAY'-COAL,
the upper stratum of coal; DAY'-DREAM, a dreaming or musing while awake;
DAY'-FLY, a fly which lives in its perfect form only for a day, one of the
ephemera; DAY'-L[=A]'BOUR; DAY'-L[=A]'BOURER; DAY'LIGHT; DAY'-LIL'Y, a
flower whose blossoms last only for a day, the hemerocallis.--_adj._
DAY'LONG, during the whole day.--_ns._ DAY'-PEEP (_Milt._), the dawn;
DAY'-SCHOL'AR, a boy who attends a boarding-school during the school-hours,
but boards at home; DAY'-SCHOOL, a school held during the day, as opposed
both to a night-school and to a boarding-school; DAY'-SIGHT =
night-blindness; DAYS'MAN, one who appoints a day to hear a cause: an
umpire; DAY'SPRING, dawn; DAY'STAR, the morning star; DAY'TIME.--_adj._
DAY'-WEA'RIED (_Shak._), wearied with the work of the day.--_n._
DAY'-WORK.--DAY BY DAY, daily; DAY OF DOOM, the judgment day; DAYS OF
GRACE, three days allowed for payment of bills, &c., beyond the day
named.--NAME THE DAY, to fix the day of marriage.--ONE OF THESE DAYS, an
indefinite reference to the near future.--THE DAY, the time spoken of:
(_Scot._) to-day; THE OTHER DAY, not long ago; THE TIME OF DAY, a greeting,
as, 'to give a person the time of day,' to greet him. [A.S. _dæg_; Ger.
_tag_; not conn. with L. _dies_.]

DAYAK. See DYAK.

DAY-WOMAN, d[=a]'-woom'an, _n._ (_Shak._) a dairymaid.

DAZE, d[=a]z, _v.t._ to stun, to stupefy. [Ice. _dasa_, to be breathless;
cf. A.S. _dwæs_, foolish.]

DAZZLE, daz'l, _v.t._ to daze or overpower with any strong light: to
confound by brilliancy, beauty, or cleverness.--_ns._ DAZZ'LEMENT, the act
of dazzling: that which dazzles; DAZZ'LER; DAZZ'LING.--_adv._ DAZZ'LINGLY.
[Freq. of _daze_.]

DEACON, d[=e]'kn, _n._ in Episcopal churches, a member of the order of
clergy under priests: in some Presbyterian churches, an officer, distinct
from the elders, who attends to the secular affairs of the church: in
Congregational and some other churches, an officer who advises the pastor,
distributes the elements at the Communion, and dispenses charity: in
Scotland, the master of an incorporated company:--_fem._ DEA'CONESS, a
female servant of the Christian society in the time of the apostles: in a
convent, a nun who has the care of the altar: one of an order of women in
some Protestant churches who nurse the sick and tend the poor.--_ns._
DEA'CONHOOD, DEA'CONRY, DEA'CONSHIP. [L. _diaconus_--Gr. _diakonos_, a
servant.]

[Illustration]

DEAD, ded, _adj._ without life: death-like: at rest, of a ball: cold and
cheerless: without vegetation: utter: unerring.--_v.t._ to deaden,
dull.--_adv._ in a dead manner.--_n._ the time of greatest stillness, as
'the dead of night.'--_adjs._ DEAD'-ALIVE', DEAD'-AND-ALIVE', dull,
uneventful; DEAD'-BEAT, quite overcome; DEAD'-BORN, still-born.--_n.pl._
DEAD'-CLOTHES, clothes in which to bury the dead.--_n._ DEAD'-COL'OURING,
the first broad outlines of a picture.--_adjs._ DEAD'-DO'ING (_Spens._),
putting to death, destructive; DEAD'-DRUNK, completely drunk.--_v.t._
DEAD'EN, to make dead: to deprive partly of vigour or sensation: to blunt:
to lessen.--_ns._ DEAD'-EYE, (_naut._), a round, flattish wooden block with
a rope or iron band passing round it, and pierced with three holes for a
lanyard; DEAD'-FALL, a trap operated by a weight that, when its support is
removed, falls upon and kills or holds an animal; DEAD'-FREIGHT, money paid
for the empty space in a ship by a person who engages to freight her, but
fails to make out a full cargo; DEAD'-HEAD (_U.S._), one who is allowed,
without payment, to ride in a public carriage, sit in a theatre, or hold a
privilege having a money value; DEAD'-HEAT, a heat or race in which no one
gains the advantage; DEAD'-HOUSE, the house or room where (in hospitals,
police-offices, &c.) dead bodies are kept till buried: a mortuary;
DEAD'-LETT'ER, a letter undelivered and unclaimed at the post-office: a law
or ordinance which has been made but never enforced; DEAD'-LEV'EL, a
stretch of land without any rising ground: sameness; DEAD'-LIFT, a lift
made without help, leverage, &c.; hence an effort under discouraging
conditions.--_n.pl._ DEAD'-LIGHTS, storm-shutters for a cabin
window.--_ns._ DEAD'LINESS; DEAD'-LOCK, the case when matters have become
so complicated that all is at a complete standstill.--_adj._ DEAD'LY,
causing death: fatal: implacable.--_adv._ in a manner resembling
death.--_ns._ DEAD'LY-NIGHT'SHADE, the plant Belladonna (q.v.);
DEAD'-MARCH, a piece of solemn music played at funeral processions, esp. of
soldiers; DEAD'-MEAT, the flesh of animals ready for the market.--_n.pl._
DEAD'-MEN, empty bottles after a carouse.--_ns._ DEAD'NESS; DEAD'-NETT'LE,
a genus of plants of the natural order _Labiatæ_, so called because they
resemble nettles but do not sting; DEAD'-PAY, continued pay dishonestly
drawn for men actually dead; DEAD'-RECK'ONING, an estimation of a ship's
place simply by the log-book; DEAD'-ROPE, a rope not running in any block;
DEAD'-SET, a determined and prolonged attempt; DEAD'-SHOT, an unerring
marksman.--_adj._ DEAD'-STROKE, without recoil.--_ns._ DEAD'-WALL, a wall
unbroken by windows or other openings; DEAD'-WA'TER, the eddy water closing
in behind a ship's stern as she sails; DEAD'-WEIGHT, a heavy or oppressive
burden; DEAD'-WIND, a wind coming directly ahead or opposed to a ship's
course; DEAD'-WOOD, pieces of timber laid on the upper side of the keel at
either end, useless material; DEAD'-WORK, work, itself unprofitable, which
is necessary as a preliminary, as the opening of a mine.--DEAD AS A
DOOR-NAIL, absolutely dead; DEAD LANGUAGE, one no longer spoken; DEAD-MEN'S
BELLS, the foxglove; DEAD-MEN'S FINGERS, a very common coelenterate
belonging to the _Actinozoa_--also _Cow-paps_ and _Mermaid's glove_;
DEAD-MEN'S SHOES, a situation formerly held by some one now dead; DEAD'S
PART (_Scots law_), the part of a man's movable property which he may
bequeath by will, and which is not due to wife and children.--BE DEAD SET
AGAINST, to be utterly opposed to.--PUT THE DEAD WOOD ON (_U.S. slang_), to
gain a great advantage over. [A.S. _deád_; Goth. _dauths_, Ger. _todt_,
from root of _die_.]

DEAF, def, _adj._ dull of hearing: unable to hear at all: not willing to
hear: inattentive.--_v.t._ DEAF'EN, to make deaf, partly or altogether: to
stun: to render impervious to sound.--_n._ DEAF'ENING, stuffing put into
floors, partition-walls, &c. to prevent sounds from passing
through.--_adv._ DEAF'LY.--_ns._ DEAF'-MUTE, one who is both deaf and dumb;
DEAF'NESS. [A.S. _deáf_; Dut. _doof_, Ger. _taub_.]

DEAL, d[=e]l, _n._ a portion; an indefinite quantity: a large quantity; the
act of dividing cards: (_U.S._) a bargain: a fir or pine board:
timber.--_v.t._ to divide, to distribute: to throw about: to
deliver.--_v.i._ to transact business: to act: to distribute
cards.--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._ dealt (delt).--_ns._ DEAL'ER, one who deals: a
trader; DEAL'-FISH, a genus of ribbon-fishes; DEAL'ING, manner of acting
towards others: intercourse of trade. [A.S. _d['æ]lan_--_d['æ]l_, a part;
Ger. _theilen_--_theil_, a part or division. A doublet of _dole_. By some,
however, _deal_, a plank, is taken as a doublet of _thill_, from A.S.
_thel_, a plank.]

DEAMBULATORY, d[=e]-am'b[=u]-la-to-ri, _n._ a passage or aisle round the
choir and apse of a church. [L. _deambul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to walk
about.]

DEAN, d[=e]n, _n._ a small valley.--Also DENE. [A.S. _denu_, a valley. Cf.
DEN.]

DEAN, d[=e]n, _n._ a dignitary in cathedral and collegiate churches who
presides over the other clergy: the president of faculty in a college; the
chief chaplain of the Chapel Royal: the chief judge of the Court of Arches:
the president of a trade-guild.--_ns._ DEAN'ERY, the office of a dean: a
dean's house; DEAN'SHIP, the office or dignity of a dean.--DEAN OF ARCHES,
dean of the Court of Arches (see ARCH); DEAN OF FACULTY, president of the
Faculty of Advocates in Scotland: DEAN OF GUILD, a municipal functionary in
Scotland, who has authority over building and altering of houses.--RURAL
DEAN, one who, under the bishop, has the special care and inspection of the
clergy in certain parishes. [O. Fr. _deien_ (Fr. _doyen_)--Low L.
_decanus_, a chief of ten--L. _decem_, ten.]

DEAR, d[=e]r, _adj._ high in price: costly: scarce: highly valued: beloved:
(_Shak._), earnest, inmost.--_n._ one who is dear or beloved.--_adv._ at a
high price.--_adj._ DEAR'-BOUGHT.--_n._ DEAR'LING (_Spens._), a
darling.--_adj._ DEAR'-LOVED.--_adv._ DEAR'LY.--_ns._ DEAR'NESS; DEAR'Y,
one who is dear. [A.S. _deóre_, _dýre_; cog. with Ger. _theuer_.]

DEAR, d[=e]r, _interj._ indicating surprise, pity, or other emotion, as in
'Oh dear!' 'Dear me!' 'Dear, dear!'--prob. elliptical in 'Dear help us!'
&c. [Sometimes doubtfully referred to _Dio mio_ (It. 'My God'), or to some
compound of Fr. _Dieu_.]

DEARN, DEARNFUL, DERNLY. See DERN, &c.

DEARTH, d[.e]rth, _n._ dearness, high price: scarcity: want: famine;
barrenness.--_adj._ DEARTH'FUL (_Scot._), expensive.

DEASIL, d[=e]'sh[=e]l, _n._ (_Scot._) motion according to the apparent
course of the sun--opp. to _Withershins_.--Also DEA'SOIL, DEI'SHEAL,
DEA'SIUL. [Gael.]

DEARTICULATE, d[=e]-ar-tik'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to disjoint.

DEASPIRATE, d[=e]-as'pir-[=a]t, _v.t._ to remove the aspirate.

DEATH, deth, _n._ state of being dead: extinction or cessation of life:
manner of dying: mortality: a deadly plague: cause of death: spiritual
lifelessness: the killing of the animal in hunting.--_ns._ DEATH'-ADD'ER, a
poisonous Australian snake; DEATH'-AG'ONY, the struggle often preceding
death; DEATH'-BED, the bed on which one dies, the last illness;
DEATH'-BELL, the passing bell; DEATH'-BLOW, a blow that causes death;
DEATH'-DAMP, a cold, clammy sweat preceding death.--_n.pl._
DEATH'-D[=U]'TIES, duties paid to government on the inheritance of
property, real or personal, after the death of the former owner.--_n._
DEATH'-FIRE, a kind of light supposed to presage death.--_adjs._ DEATH'FUL,
DEATH'LY, deadly, destructive; DEATH'LESS, never dying: everlasting.--_n._
DEATH'LESSNESS.--_adj._ DEATH'-LIKE (_Shak._), like a dead person,
deadly.--_n._ DEATH'LINESS.--_adj._ DEATH'-MARKED, marked for or by death,
destined to die.--_n._ DEATH'-MASK, a plaster-cast taken from the face
after death.--_adj._ DEATH'-PRAC'TISED (_Shak._), threatened with death by
malicious arts.--_ns._ DEATH'-RATE, the proportion of deaths to the
population; DEATH'-RATT'LE, a rattling in the throat which sometimes
accompanies the last uneasy breathings of a dying person; DEATH'S'-DOOR,
the point of death; DEATH'S'-HEAD, the skull of a human skeleton, or a
figure of it; DEATH'S'-MAN (_Shak._), the public executioner;
DEATH'-STROKE, a death-blow; DEATH'-THROE, the dying agony;
DEATH'-T[=O]'KEN (_Shak._), a sign or token of impending death, a
plague-spot; DEATH'-TRAP, an unsafe building, vessel, or place that shuts
up its occupants to almost certain death; DEATH'-WARR'ANT, an order from
the authorities for the execution of a criminal; DEATH'-WATCH, a watch by a
dying person: a popular name for several insects which produce a ticking
noise, specially audible in the stillness of a death-chamber; DEATH'-WOUND,
a wound which caused death.--DEATH'S'-HEAD MOTH, a species of hawk-moth,
having pale markings on the back of the thorax somewhat like a skull.--BE
DEATH ON, to be fond of, to be good at; BE IN AT THE DEATH, in hunting, to
be up on the animal before the dogs have killed it.--DO, or PUT, TO DEATH,
to kill: to cause to be killed.--GATES, or JAWS, OF DEATH, death's door,
the point of death.--TO DEATH, expressive of intensity, very much. [A.S.
_deáth_; Ger. _tod_. See DEAD and DIE.]

DEAVE, d[=e]v, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to render deaf. [See DEAF.]

DEAW, d[=u], _v.t._ (_Spens._) to bedew.

DEBACLE, de-bak'l, _n._ a breaking up of ice on a river: (_geol._) a sudden
flood of water leaving its path strewed with debris. [Fr. _débâcle_; _de_,
and _bâcler_, to bar--L. _baculus_, a stick.]

DEBAR, de-bär', _v.t._ to bar out from: to exclude: to hinder:--_pr.p._
debar'ring; _pa.p._ debarred'.--_n._ DEBAR'MENT. [L. _de_, from, and
_bar_.]

DEBARK, de-bärk', _v.t._ or _v.i._ to land from a ship or boat: to
disembark.--_ns._ DEBARK[=A]'TION, DEBARC[=A]'TION. [Fr. _débarquer_--_des_
= L. _dis_, away, and _barque_, a ship.]

DEBARRASS, de-bär'as, _v.t._ to disembarrass, disentangle, free. [Fr.
_débarrasser_; _de_, and _barre_, a bar.]

DEBASE, de-b[=a]s', _v.t._ to lower: to make mean or of less value: to
adulterate.--_adj._ DEBASED', degraded: (_her._) reversed.--_n._
DEBASE'MENT, degradation.--_adj._ DEBAS'ING, tending to lower or
degrade.--_adv._ DEBAS'INGLY. [L. _de_, down, and _base_, low.]

DEBATE, de-b[=a]t', _n._ a contention in words or argument: (_obs._)
strife.--_v.t._ to contend for in argument: (_arch._) to fight for.--_v.i._
to deliberate: to join in debate.--_adjs._ DEBAT'ABLE, liable to be
disputed; DEBATE'FUL (_Spens._), quarrelsome.--_ns._ DEBATE'MENT (_Spens._,
_Shak._), controversy; DEBAT'ER.--_adv._ DEBAT'INGLY.--DEBATABLE LAND, a
tract of border land between Esk and Sark claimed both by England and
Scotland. [O. Fr. _debatre_--L. _de_, and _batu[)e]re_, to beat.]

DEBAUCH, de-bawch', _v.t._ to lead away from duty or allegiance: to corrupt
with lewdness: to pervert.--_v.i._ to indulge in revelry.--_n._ a fit of
intemperance or debauchery.--_p.adj._ DEBAUCHED', corrupt:
profligate.--_adv._ DEBAUCH'EDLY.--_ns._ DEBAUCH'EDNESS; DEB'AUCHEE, a
libertine; DEBAUCH'ER; DEBAUCH'ERY, excessive intemperance: habitual
lewdness; DEBAUCH'MENT. [O. Fr. _desbaucher_ (Fr. _débaucher_), to
corrupt--_des_ = L. _dis_, and _baucher_, to hew--_bauche_ or _bauc_, a
beam, a course of stones.]

DEBEL, de-bel', _v.t._ (_Milt._) to conquer in war. [Fr. _débeller_--L.
_debell[=a]re_--_de_, from, and _bell[=a]re_, to carry on war, from
_bellum_, war.]

DEBENTURE, de-bent'[=u]r, _n._ a written acknowledgment of a debt: a deed
of mortgage given by a railway or other company for borrowed money: a
certificate entitling an exporter of imported goods to a repayment of the
duty paid on their importation.--_p.adj._ DEBENT'URED, entitled to drawback
or debenture, as goods. [L. _debentur_, there are due, 3d pers. pl. pass.
of _deb[=e]re_, to owe--the first word of the receipt.]

DEBILITATE, de-bil'i-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to make weak: to impair the strength
of.--_adj._ DEB'ILE (_arch._), weak, feeble.--_ns._ DEBILIT[=A]'TION;
DEBIL'ITY, weakness and languor: a weak action of the animal functions. [L.
_debilit[=a]re_, _[=a]tum_--_debilis_, weak--_de_, not, _habilis_, able.
See ABILITY.]

DEBIT, deb'it, _n._ a debt or something due: an entry on the debtor side of
an account.--_v.t._ to charge with debt: to enter on the debtor side of an
account.--_n._ DEB'ITOR (_Shak._), a debtor. [L. _debitum_, what is due,
from _deb[=e]re_, to owe.]

DEBITUMINISE, d[=e]-bi-t[=u]'mi-n[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of bitumen.

DÉBLAI, d[=a]-bl[=a]', _n._ the earth excavated from a ditch to form a
parapet. [Fr.]

DEBONAIR, deb-o-n[=a]r', _adj._ of good appearance and manners: elegant:
courteous: gay.--_adv._ DEBONAIR'LY.--_n._ DEBONAIR'NESS. [Fr. _de_, of,
_bon_, good, _air_, appearance, manner.]

DEBOSH, de-bosh', an old form of _debauch_.

DEBOUCH, de-b[=oo]sh', _v.i._ to march out from a narrow pass or confined
place.--_ns._ DEBOUCH'MENT, the act of debouching; DEBOUCHURE', the mouth
of a river or strait. [Fr. _déboucher_--_de_, from, _bouche_, the mouth--L.
_bucca_, the cheek.]

DÉBOUCHÉ, de-boo-sh[=a]', _n._ an opening, a passage: a market. [Fr.]

DEBRIS, de-br[=e]', _n.sing._ and _pl._ rubbish: ruins: a mass of rocky
fragments. [Fr., from _briser_, akin to _bruise_.]

DEBRUISED, de-br[=oo]zd', _p.adj._ (_her._) surmounted or partly covered by
one of the ordinaries. [O. Fr. _debrusier_--_de_, apart, _brusier_, to
break.]

DEBT, det, _n._ what one owes to another: what one becomes liable to do or
suffer: a state of obligation or indebtedness: a duty: (_B._) a
sin.--_p.adj._ DEBT'ED (_Shak._), indebted, obliged to.--_ns._ DEBT'EE, a
creditor; DEBT'OR, one who owes a debt: the side of an account on which
debts are charged.--DEBT OF HONOUR, a debt not recognised by law, but
binding in honour--esp. gambling and betting debts; DEBT OF NATURE,
death.--ACTIVE DEBT, a debt due to one, as opposed to _Passive debt_, a
debt one owes; FLOATING DEBT, miscellaneous public debt, like exchequer and
treasury bills, as opposed to _Funded debt_, that which has been converted
into perpetual annuities like consols in Britain.--IN ONE'S DEBT, under a
pecuniary obligation to one. [O. Fr. _dette_--L. _debitum_, _deb[=e]re_, to
owe.]

DÉBUT, de-bü' (_u_ sounded as in Scot. _gude_), _n._ a beginning or first
attempt: a first appearance before the public, as of an actor, &c.--_n._
DÉBUTANT', one who makes his first appearance before the public:--_fem._
DÉBUTANTE'. [Fr. _début_, a first stroke--_débuter_--_de_, from, _but_,
aim, mark.]

DECACHORD, dek'a-kord, _n._ an ancient musical instrument with ten strings:
anything having ten parts. [Gr. _dekachordos_--_deka_, ten, and
_chord[=e]_, a string.]

DECACUMINATED, d[=e]-ka-k[=u]'mi-n[=a]-ted, _adj._ having the top cut off.

DECADE, dek'[=a]d, DECAD, dek'ad, _n._ a group of ten, esp. a series of ten
years.--_adj._ DEC'ADAL. [Fr. _décade_--Gr. _dekas_--_deka_, ten.]

DECADENCE, dek'a-dens, or de-k[=a]'-, DEC'ADENCY (or de-k[=a]'-), _n._
state of decay: a term for a school in modern French literature not
distinguished for vigour or originality.--_adj._ DEC'ADENT (or de-k[=a]'-),
decaying.--_n._ something decaying or decayed. [Fr.,--Low L. _decadentia_,
from L. _de_, down--_cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

DECAGON, dek'a-gon, _n._ a plane figure of ten angles and sides.--_adj._
DECAG'ONAL. [Gr. _deka_, and _g[=o]nia_, an angle.]

DECAGRAMME, DECAGRAM, dek'a-gram, _n._ a weight of ten grammes, equal to
0.353 oz. [Fr.,--Gr. _deka_, ten, and _gramma_, a weight; L. _granum_, a
grain.]

DECAGYNIA, dek-a-jin'i-a, _n._ a class of plants in the Linnæan system
having ten pistils.--_adjs._ DECAGYN'IAN, DECAG'YNOUS. [Gr. _deka_, ten,
_gyn[=e]_, a woman.]

DECAHEDRON, dek-a-h[=e]'dron, _n._ a solid figure having ten faces.--_adj._
DECAH[=E]'DRAL. [Gr. _deka_, and _hedra_, a seat.]

DECALCIFY, de-kal'si-f[=i], _v.i._ to deprive of lime: to take the
calcareous matter out of bones, teeth, &c.--_n._ DECALCIFIC[=A]'TION. [L.
_de_, away from, _calx_, _calcis_, lime, _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

DECALCOMANIA, d[=e]-kal-k[=o]-m[=a]'ni-a, _n._ the process of transferring
pictures to marble, glass, wood, &c. [Fr.]

DECALITRE, dek'a-l[=e]t-[.e]r, _n._ a French measure, ten litres: equal to
2½ imperial gallons. [Fr.,--Gr. _deka_, ten, and _litra_, a pound.]

DECALOGUE, dek'a-log, _n._ the ten commandments.--_n._ DECAL'OGIST. [Gr.
_deka_, ten, _logos_, a discourse.]

DECAMERON, de-kam'e-ron, _n._ Boccaccio's hundred tales, supposed to be
told in ten days.--_adj._ DECAMERON'IC. [From Gr. _deka_, ten, _h[=e]mera_,
a day.]

DECAMETRE, dek'a-m[=e]t-[.e]r, _n._ a French measure of ten metres, or 32.8
feet. [Fr. _décamètre_--Gr. _deka_, ten, _metron_, a measure. See METRE.]

DECAMP, de-kamp', _v.i._ to go away, esp. secretly.--_n._ DECAMP'MENT. [Fr.
_décamper_.]

DECANAL, dek'an-al, _adj._ pertaining to a dean or deanery.

DECANDRIA, de-kan'dri-a, _n._ a class of plants in the Linnæan system
having ten stamens.--_adjs._ DECAN'DRIAN, DECAN'DROUS. [Gr. _deka_, ten,
and _an[=e]r_, _andros_, a man.]

DECANGULAR, dek-ang'g[=u]-lar, _adj._ having ten angles. [Gr. _deka_, ten,
and L. _angulus_, an angle.]

DECANT, de-kant', _v.t._ to pour off, leaving sediment: to pour from one
vessel into another.--_ns._ DECANT[=A]'TION; DECANT'ER, an ornamental
bottle for holding decanted liquor. [Fr. _décanter_ (It.
_decantare_)--_de_, from, and Low L. _cantus_, a side or corner.]

DECAPHYLLOUS, dek-a-fil'us, _adj._ having ten leaves. [Gr. _deka_, ten,
_phyllon_, a leaf.]

DECAPITATE, de-kap'i-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to take the head from: to behead.--_n._
DECAPIT[=A]'TION. [Low L. _decapit[=a]re_--L. _de_, from, and _caput_,
_capitis_, the head.]

DECAPOD, dek'a-pod, _n._ one of the shellfish which have ten feet or claws,
as the crab.--_adjs._ DECA'PODAL, DECA'PODOUS. [Gr. _deka_, ten, and
_pous_, _podos_, a foot.]

DECARBONATE, de-kär'bon-[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of carbon--also
DECAR'BONISE, DECAR'BURISE.--_ns._ DECARBONIS[=A]'TION,
DECARBURIS[=A]'TION. [_De_, from, _carbon_.]

DECASTICH, dek'a-stik, _n._ a poem of ten lines. [Gr. _deka_, ten, and
_stichos_, a row, a verse.]

DECASTYLE, dek'a-st[=i]l, _n._ a portico with ten columns in front. [Gr.
_deka_, ten, _stylos_, a column.]

DECASYLLABIC, dek-a-sil-ab'ik, _adj._ having ten syllables. [Gr. _deka_,
ten, _syllab[=e]_, a syllable.]

DECAUDATE, de-kaw'd[=a]t, _v.t._ to cut off the tail of. [L. _de_, and
_cauda_, tail.]

DECAY, d[=e]-k[=a]', _v.i._ to fall away from a state of health or
excellence: to waste away.--_v.t._ to cause to waste away: to impair.--_n._
a falling into a worse or less perfect state: a passing away: loss of
fortune: (_obs._) misfortune.--_p.adj._ DECAYED', reduced in
circumstances.--_n._ DECAYED'NESS. [O. Fr. _decair_--L. _de_, from
_cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

DECEASE, d[=e]-s[=e]s', _n._ death.--_v.i._ to die.--_p.adj._ DECEASED',
dead. [O. Fr. _deces_ (Fr. _décès_)--L. _decessus_--_de_, away,
_ced[)e]re_, _cessum_, to go.]

DECEIT, de-s[=e]t', _n._ act of deceiving: anything intended to mislead
another: fraud: falseness.--_adj._ DECEIT'FUL, full of deceit: disposed or
tending to deceive: insincere.--_adv._ DECEIT'FULLY.--_n._ DECEIT'FULNESS.
[O. Fr., from L. _decip[)e]re_, _deceptum_, to deceive.]

DECEIVE, de-s[=e]v', _v.t._ to mislead or cause to err: to cheat: to
disappoint.--_adj._ DECEIV'ABLE, that may be deceived: exposed to
imposture.--_n._ DECEIV'ABLENESS.--_adj._ DECEIV'ABLY.--_n._ DECEIV'ER.
[Fr. _décevoir_--L. _decip[)e]re_, _deceptum_--_de_, from _cap[)e]re_, to
take, catch.]

DECEMBER, de-sem'b[.e]r, _n._ the tenth month among the Romans, who began
their year with March: with us, the twelfth month of the year.--_adj._
DECEM'BERLY, wintry, cold.--_n._ DECEM'BRIST, one of those who took part in
the Russian conspiracy of December 1825. [L. _decem_, ten.]

DECEMDENTATE, d[=e]-sem-den't[=a]t, _adj._ having ten points or teeth.

DECEMFID, d[=e]-sem'fid, _adj._ divided into ten parts.

DECEMLOCULAR, d[=e]-sem-lok'[=u]-lar, _adj._ ten-celled.

DECEMPEDAL, d[=e]-sem'ped-al, _adj._ having ten feet.

DECEMVIR, de-sem'vir, _n._ one of ten magistrates who at one time had
absolute power in ancient Rome:--_pl._ DECEM'VIRS, or (L.) DECEMVIRI
(d[=e]-sem'vi-r[=i]).--_adj._ DECEM'VIRAL.--_n._ DECEM'VIR[=A]TE, a body of
ten men in office: the term of office of decemvirs. [L. _decem_, ten, and
_vir_, a man.]

DECENNARY, de-sen'ar-i, _n._ a period of ten years--also
DECENN'IUM.--_adj._ DECENN'IAL, consisting of or happening every ten years.
[L. _decem_, ten, and _annus_, a year.]

DECENNOVAL, de-sen'[=o]-val, _adj._ pertaining to the number 15.

DECENT, d[=e]'sent, _adj._ becoming: seemly: proper: modest: moderate:
tolerable.--_n._ D[=E]'CENCY, becomingness: modesty.--_adv._ D[=E]'CENTLY.
[L. _decens_, _decentis_, pr.p. of _dec[=e]re_, to be becoming.]

DECENTRALISE, de-sen'tral-[=i]z, _v.t._ to withdraw from the centre: to
transfer functions from the central government to local centres.--_n._
DECENTRALIS[=A]'TION. [L. _de_, neg., and _centralise_.]

DECEPTION, de-sep'shun, _n._ act of deceiving: the means by which it is
sought to deceive.--_n._ DECEPTIBIL'ITY.--_adjs._ DECEPT'IBLE, capable of
being deceived; DECEP'TIOUS (_Shak._), deceitful; DECEP'TIVE, tending to
deceive: misleading.--_adv._ DECEP'TIVELY.--_n._ DECEP'TIVENESS.--_adj._
DECEP'TORY, tending to deceive. [O. Fr.,--Low L. _deceptio_,
_-nis_--_decip[)e]re_, to deceive.]

DECERN, de-s[.e]rn', _v.t._ and _v.i._ (_Scots law_) to judge: to decree:
to pass judgment. [O. Fr. _decerner_--L. _decern[)e]re_--_de_, and
_cern[)e]re_, to distinguish.]

DECESSION, de-sesh'un, _n._ departure. [See DECEASE.]

DECHARM, d[=e]-chärm', _v.t._ to disenchant.

DECHRISTIANISE, de-krist'yan-[=i]z, _v.t._ to turn from Christianity: to
destroy Christian elements.

DECIARE, de'si-är, _n._ the tenth part of an are. [Fr.,--L. _deci-_ (in
_decimus_), and _are_.]

DECIDE, de-s[=i]d', _v.t._ to determine: to end: to settle: to
resolve.--_adjs._ DECID'ABLE, capable of being decided; DECID'ED,
determined: clear, unmistakable: resolute.--_adv._ DECID'EDLY. [O. Fr.
_decider_--L. _decid[=e]re_--_de_, away, _cæd[)e]re_, to cut.]

DECIDUOUS, de-sid'[=u]-us, _adj._ that fall in autumn, as leaves: not
permanent.--_n._ DECID'UA, a membrane of the uterus discharged after
parturition.--_adj._ DECID'U[=A]TE.--_n._ DECID'UOUSNESS.--DECIDUOUS TREES,
those which annually lose and renew their leaves. [L.
_deciduus_--_decid[)e]re_, _de_, from, _cad[)e]re_, to fall.]

DECIGRAMME, de'si-gram, _n._ the tenth part of a gramme. [See GRAMME (3).]

DECILITRE, des'i-l[=e]-t[.e]r, _n._ a measure of capacity equal to 1/10
litre.

DECILLION, de-sil'yun, _n._ a million raised to the tenth power: in the
French and American notation, a thousand raised to the eleventh power.

DECIMAL, des'i-mal, _adj._ numbered or proceeding by tens.--_n._ a fraction
having ten or some power of ten for its denominator.--_v.t._ DEC'IMALISE,
to reduce to the decimal system.--_ns._ DEC'IMALISM; DEC'IMALIST.--_adv._
DEC'IMALLY.--DECIMAL NOTATION, a system of writing numbers based on ten and
powers of ten, like our ordinary system; DECIMAL SYSTEM, a system whose
units are tens and powers of tens, esp. in the French _metric system_ of
weights and measures. [Fr.,--Low L. _decimalis_--_decem_, ten.]

DECIMATE, des'i-m[=a]t, _v.t._ to take the tenth part of: to put to death
every tenth man.--_ns._ DECIM[=A]'TION, a military punishment, by which
every tenth man was selected by lot and put to death or otherwise punished;
DEC'IMATOR. [L. _decim[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_decimus_, tenth.]

DECIME, de-s[=e]m', _n._ a French coin equal to 1/10 franc.

DECIMETRE, des'i-m[=e]-t[.e]r, _n._ a measure of length equal to 1/10
metre.

DECIPHER, de-s[=i]'f[.e]r, _v.t._ to uncipher or read secret writing: to
make out what is unintelligible or obscure: to reveal.--_adj._
DECI'PHERABLE.--_n._ DECI'PHERMENT. [L. _de_, neg. and _cipher_.]

DECISION, de-sizh'un, _n._ the act of deciding: settlement: judgment: the
quality of being decided in character.--_adj._ DEC[=I]'SIVE, having the
power of deciding: showing decision: final: positive.--_adv._
DEC[=I]'SIVELY.--_n._ DEC[=I]'SIVENESS.--_adj._ DEC[=I]'SORY, decisive.
[See DECIDE.]

DECISTÈRE, des-i-st[=a]r, _n._ a cubic measure equal to 1/10 stere.

DECITIZENISE, d[=e]-sit'i-zen-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of citizenship.

DECIVILISE, d[=e]-siv'i-l[=i]z, _v.t._ to reduce from a civilised to a more
savage state.

DECK, dek, _v.t._ to cover: to clothe: to adorn: to furnish with a deck, as
a vessel.--_n._ a covering: a horizontal platform extending from one side
of a vessel to the other, thereby joining them together, and forming both a
floor and a covering: the part of a pack of cards that remains after the
deal, or the part of a pack necessary for playing such games as bezique,
&c.--_ns._ DECK'-CAR'GO, cargo stowed on the deck of a vessel; DECK'-CHAIR,
a light chair of spars and canvas, to be used on board ship; DECK'ER, the
person or thing that decks: a vessel which has a deck or decks, used only
in composition, as _a three-decker_, a ship with three decks; DECK'-HAND, a
person employed on deck; DECK'-HOUSE, a house or box on deck; DECK'ING,
adornment; DECK'-LOAD, a deck-cargo; DECK'-PASS'AGE, a passage securing
only the right of being on deck, without cabin accommodation;
DECK'-PASS'ENGER; FLUSH'-DECK, a deck continuous from stem to stern at the
same level (see QUARTER-DECK); GUN'-DECK, a deck on which guns are carried;
HUR'RICANE-DECK, a light partial deck over the saloon of some steamers;
MAIN'-DECK, the deck below the spar-deck; SPAR'-DECK, the upper deck of a
ship. [Dut. _dekken_, to cover; Ger. _decken_; akin to L. _teg[)e]re_.]

DECKLE, dek'l, _n._ the gauge on a paper-making machine.--_n._
DECK'LE-EDGE, the raw or ragged edge of handmade paper.--_adj._
DECK'LE-EDGED, having a rough uncut edge. [Ger.]

DECLAIM, de-kl[=a]m', _v.i._ to make a set or rhetorical speech: to
harangue: to recite in public.--_ns._ DECLAIM'ANT, DECLAIM'ER.--_p.adj._
DECLAIM'ING.--_ns._ DECLAM[=A]'TION, act of declaiming: a set speech in
public: display in speaking.--_adj._ DECLAM'ATORY, of the nature of
declamation: appealing to the passions: noisy and rhetorical merely. [L.
_declam[=a]re_--_de_, inten., _clam[=a]re_, to cry out.]

DECLARE, de-kl[=a]r', _v.t._ to make known: to announce: to assert: to make
a full statement of, as of goods at a custom-house.--_v.i._ to make a
statement: to show cards in order to score.--_adj._ DECL[=A]R'ABLE, capable
of being declared, exhibited, or proved.--_ns._ DECLAR'ANT, one who makes a
declaration; DECLAR[=A]'TION, act of declaring: that which is declared: a
written affirmation: in the criminal law of Scotland, the statement made by
the prisoner before the magistrate: in common law, the pleading in which
the plaintiff in an action at law sets forth his case against the
defendant.--_adjs._ DECLAR'ATIVE, DECLAR'ATORY, explanatory.--_advs._
DECLAR'ATIVELY, DECLAR'ATORILY.--_n._ DECLAR'ATOR, a form of action in the
Court of Session in Scotland, with the view of having a fact judicially
ascertained and declared.--_adj._ DECLARED', avowed.--_adv._ DECLA'REDLY,
avowedly.--DECLARATORY ACT, an act intended to explain an old law which had
become obscure or a subject of controversy. [Fr. _déclarer_, from L.
_declar[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, wholly, _clarus_, clear.]

DECLENSION, de-klen'shun, _n._ a falling off: decay: descent: (_gram._)
change of termination for the oblique cases. [See DECLINE.]

DECLINE, de-kl[=i]n', _v.i._ to bend or turn away from (a straight line);
to deviate: to refuse: to bend down: to fail or decay: to stoop or
condescend: to draw to an end.--_v.t._ to bend down: to turn away from: to
refuse: to avoid: (_gram._) to give the changes of a word in the oblique
cases.--_n._ a falling off: deviation: decay: a gradual sinking of the
bodily faculties, consumption.--_adjs._ DECLIN'ABLE, having inflection for
the oblique cases; DECL[=I]'NAL, bending downward; DEC'LINANT (_her._),
having the tail hanging down--also DEC'LIVANT.--_ns._ DECLIN[=A]'TION, act
of declining: a sloping or bending downward: deviation: (_astron._)
distance from the celestial equator; DEC'LIN[=A]TOR, an instrument
determining declination.--_adj._ DECLIN'ATORY, containing a declination or
refusal--_ns._ DECLIN'ATURE, act of declining or refusing: (_law_) a plea
declining the jurisdiction of a judge; DECLINOM'ETER, an instrument for
measuring the DECLINATION OF THE COMPASS--i.e. the deviation of the
magnetic needle from the true north. [Fr. _décliner_--L. _de_, down, away
from, _clin[=a]re_, to bend. See LEAN.]

DECLIVITY, de-kliv'i-ti, _n._ a place that declines, or slopes downward,
opposite of _acclivity_: inclination downward: a gradual descent.--_adjs._
DECLIV'ITOUS, DECL[=I]'VOUS. [Fr.,--L. _declivitas_--_de_, downward,
_clivus_, sloping, akin to _clin[=a]re_.]

DECOCT, de-kokt', _v.t._ to prepare by boiling: to extract the substance of
by boiling: to boil: to devise.--_adjs._ DECOC'TIBLE, DECOC'TIVE.--_ns._
DECOC'TION, an extract of anything got by boiling; DECOC'TURE, a substance
prepared by decoction. [L. _decoqu[)e]re_, _decoctum_--_de_, down,
_coqu[)e]re_, to cook.]

DECODE, de-k[=o]d', _v.t._ to translate the symbols in a code telegram into
ordinary language.

DECOLLATE, de-kol'[=a]t, _v.t._ to behead.--_p.adj._ DECOLL'ATED, rounded
off, as the apex of a shell.--_n._ DECOLL[=A]'TION, the act of beheading: a
picture of a decapitation, esp. of the head of St John the Baptist on a
charger: the festival of the Baptist, Aug. 29. [L. _decoll[=a]re_--_de_,
from, _collum_, the neck.]

DECOLLETÉ, d[=a]-kol-e-t[=a]', _adj._ with neck uncovered: of dress, low
cut. [Fr. _décolleter_, to bare the neck and shoulders. Cf. DECOLLATE.]

DECOLOUR, de-kul'ur, _v.t._ to deprive of colour--also DECOL'OURISE.--_n._
DECOL'ORANT, a substance that bleaches or removes colour.--_v.t._
DECOL'ORATE, to deprive of colour.--_ns._ DECOLOR[=A]'TION, removal or
absence of colour; DECOLORIS[=A]'TION. [Fr. _décolorer_--L.
_decolor[=a]re_--_de_, from, _color_, colour.]

DECOMPLEX, d[=e]'kom-pleks, _adj._ repeatedly compound.

DECOMPOSE, de-kom-poz', _v.t._ to separate the parts composing anything: to
resolve into original elements.--_v.i._ to decay, rot.--_adj._
DECOMPOS'ABLE.--_n._ DECOMPOSI'TION, act of decomposing: decay or
dissolution: also the compounding of things already compound. [L. _de_,
neg., and _compose_.]

DECOMPOSITE, d[=e]-kom-poz'it, or de-kom'-, _adj._ compound a second time
or more than once. [L. _de_, and _composite_.]

DECOMPOUND, de-kom-pownd', _v.t._ to compound again: to compound things
already compounded; also, to divide a thing into its constituent
parts.--_adj._ compounded a second time.--_adj._ DECOMPOUND'ABLE. [L. _de_,
and _compound_.]

DECONCENTRATE, de-kon-sen'tr[=a]t, or de-kon'sen-tr[=a]t, _v.t._ to
scatter.--_n._ DECONCENTR[=A]'TION. [_De_, and _concentrate_.]

DECONSECRATE, de-kon'se-kr[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of the character given
by consecration: to secularise.--_n._ DECONSECR[=A]'TION.

DECORATE, dek'o-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to ornament, to beautify: to honour with a
badge or medal.--_adj._ DEC'ORATED.--_n._ DECOR[=A]'TION, ornament: badge
of an order.--_adj._ DEC'OR[=A]TIVE, ornamental.--_ns._ DEC'OR[=A]TIVENESS;
DEC'OR[=A]TOR.--DECORATED STYLE (_archit._), a style of Gothic
architecture, elaborated and richly decorated, which prevailed till near
the end of the 14th century.--DECORATION DAY, May 30th, when the memory of
the soldiers who fell in the American Civil War of 1861-65 is honoured by
the decoration of their graves, speeches, processions, &c. [L.
_decor[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_decus_, what is becoming--_dec[=e]re_, to be
becoming.]

DECOROUS, de-k[=o]'rus, or dek'o-rus, _adj._ becoming: suitable: proper:
decent.--_adv._ DEC[=O]'ROUSLY.--_ns._ DEC[=O]'ROUSNESS; DEC[=O]'RUM, that
which is becoming in outward appearance: propriety of conduct: decency. [L.
_decorus_, becoming.]

DECORTICATE, de-kor'ti-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of the bark, husk, or
peel.--_n._ DECORTIC[=A]'TION. [L. _decortic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_,
from, and _cortex_, bark.]

DECOY, de-koy', _v.t._ to allure: to entrap: to lure into a trap.--_n._
anything intended to allure into a snare: an apparatus of hoops and network
for trapping wild-ducks--sometimes _duck-coy_.--_n._ DECOY'-DUCK, a
wild-duck tamed and trained to entice others into a trap: (_fig._) one
employed to allure others into a snare. [L. _de_, down, and O. Fr. _coi_,
quiet; the earlier verb _to coy_ was confused with the Dut. _kooi_--L.
_cavea_, a cage. See COY.]

DECRASSIFY, d[=e]-kras'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to make less crass.

DECREASE, de-kr[=e]s', _v.i._ to become less: to be diminished by degrees
in size or power.--_v.t._ to make less: to lessen gradually.--_n._ a
growing less: loss.--_adv._ DECREAS'INGLY. [O. Fr. _decrois_, a
decrease--L. _descresc[)e]re_--_de_, from, _cresc[)e]re_, to grow.]

DECREE, de-kr[=e]', _n._ an order by one in authority: an edict or law: a
judicial decision: a predetermined purpose.--_v.t._ to decide or determine
by sentence in law: to appoint.--_v.i._ to make a decree:--_pr.p._
decree'ing; _pa.p._ decreed'.--_adjs._ DECREE'ABLE, capable of being
decreed; DECR[=E]'TIVE, having the force of a decree; DEC'R[=E]TORY,
DECRET[=O]'RIAL, established by a decree: determining: judicial.--DECREE
NISI (L. _nisi_, unless), a decree that becomes absolute unless cause be
shown to the contrary--granted esp. in divorce cases. [O. Fr. _decret_--L.
_decretum_--_decern[)e]re_, to decide.]

DECREET, de-kr[=e]t', _n._ (_Scots law_) a court judgment.

DECREMENT, dek're-ment, _n._ the act or state of decreasing: the quantity
lost by decrease. [L. _decrementum_.]

DECREPIT, de-krep'it, _adj._ worn out by the infirmities of old age: in the
last stage of decay.--_ns._ DECREP'ITNESS; DECREP'ITUDE, state of being
decrepit or worn out with age. [L. _decrepitus_, noiseless, very old--_de_,
not, _crepitus_, a noise.]

DECREPITATE, de-krep'i-t[=a]t, _v.i._ to crackle, as salts when
heated.--_v.t._ to roast so as to cause a continual crackling, to
calcine.--_n._ DECREPIT[=A]'TION. [L. _de_, inten., _crepit[=a]re_, to
rattle much, freq. of _crep[=a]re_.]

DECRESCENT, de-kres'ent, _adj._ becoming gradually less.--_n._ (_mus._)
DECRESCEN'DO = Diminuendo (q.v.). [L.]

DECRETAL, de-kr[=e]'tal, _adj._ pertaining to a decree.--_n._ a decree,
esp. of the pope: a book containing decrees: spec. in _pl._ the second part
of the canon law, the decrees of various popes determining points of
ecclesiastical law.--_n._ DECR[=E]'TIST, in medieval universities, a
student of the decretals, a student of law.--_adjs._ DECR[=E]'TIVE;
DECR[=E]'TORY, pertaining to a decree, judicial. [L.
_decretalis_--_decretum_.]

DECREW, de-kr[=oo]', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to decrease. [For _decrue_--O. Fr.
_decru_, pa.p. of _decroistre_. See DECREASE.]

DECROWN, d[=e]-krown', _v.t._ to discrown. [Fr. _découronner_, to
discrown.]

DECRUSTATION, d[=e]-krus-t[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of removing a crust.

DECRY, de-kr[=i]', _v.t._ to cry down: to condemn: to censure as worthless:
to blame:--_pa.p._ decried'.--_ns._ DECR[=I]'AL; DECR[=I]'ER. [Fr. _de(s)_
= L. _dis_, and _crier_, to cry. See CRY.]

DECUMAN, dek'[=u]-man, _adj._ principal, large--of waves, &c.: connected
with the principal gate of a Roman camp (near which the 10th cohort of the
legion was stationed).--_n._ a great wave, as every tenth wave was supposed
to be. [L. _decumanus_--_decem_, ten.]

DECUMBENT, de-kum'bent, _adj._ lying down: reclining on the ground.--_ns._
DECUB[=A]'TION, DECUM'BENCE, DECUM'BENCY, the act or posture of lying
down.--_adj._ DEC[=U]'BITAL--_n._ DEC[=U]'BITUS, a recumbent position, as
of one sick in bed: a bed-sore.--_adv._ DECUM'BENTLY.--_n._ DECUM'BITURE,
the time when a sick person takes to bed. [L. _decumbens_--_de_, down, and
_cumb[)e]re_, for _cub[=a]re_, to lie.]

DECUPLE, dek'[=u]-pl, _adj._ tenfold.--_n._ a number ten times
repeated.--_v.t._ to make tenfold. [Fr. _décuple_--L. _decem_, ten, and
_plic[=a]re_, to fold.]

DECURION, d[=e]-k[=u]'ri-on, _n._ an officer in a Roman army over ten
soldiers--a DEC'URY or DEC[=U]'RIA: any overseer of ten.--_n._
DEC[=U]'RIONATE. [L.]

DECURRENT, de-kur'ent, _adj._ running or extending downward.--_n._
DECURR'ENCY.--_adv._ DECURR'ENTLY.--_n._ DECUR'SION, a running down: a
military manoeuvre or parade.--_adj._ DECUR'SIVE.--_adv._ DECUR'SIVELY. [L.
_decurrens_--_de_, down, _curr[)e]re_, _cursum_, to run.]

DECURTATE, d[=e]-kur't[=a]t, _adj._ cut short, abridged.--_v.t._ to cut
short. [L. _decurt[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to cut short.]

DECUSSATE, de-kus'[=a]t, _v.i._ to cross in the form of an X: to cross, as
lines, &c.--_adjs._ DECUSS'ATE, -D, crossed: arranged in pairs which cross
each other, like some leaves.--_adv._ DECUSS'ATELY.--_n._ DECUSS[=A]'TION.
[L. _decuss[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_decussis_, a coin of ten asses (_decem
asses_) marked with X, symbol of ten.]

DEDAL, DEDALIAN. See DÆDAL.

DEDICATE, ded'i-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to set apart and consecrate to some sacred
purpose: to devote wholly or chiefly: to inscribe to any one.--_adj._
devoted: (_Shak._) dedicated.--_ns._ DED'ICANT, one who dedicates;
DEDICATEE (ded'i-k[=a]-t[=e]'), one to whom a thing is dedicated;
DEDIC[=A]'TION, the act of dedicating: an address to a patron, prefixed to
a book; DED'IC[=A]TOR, one who dedicates.--_adjs._ DEDICAT[=O]'RIAL,
DED'IC[=A]TORY, of or pertaining to a dedication. [L. _dedic[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, down, _dic[=e]re_, to declare.]

DEDIMUS, ded'i-mus, _n._ a writ commissioning one not a judge to act as a
judge--from its first word. [L., _dedimus_, we have given, _d[)a]re_, to
give.]

DEDUCE, de-d[=u]s', _v.t._ to draw from: to infer a truth or opinion from
what precedes or from premises.--_ns._ DEDUCE'MENT, what is deduced;
DEDUCIBIL'ITY, the quality of being deducible.--_adj._ DEDUC'IBLE, that may
be deduced or inferred.--_v.t._ DEDUCT', to take from: to separate: to
subtract.--_adj._ DEDUCT'IBLE.--_n._ DEDUC'TION, (1) the act of deducing:
that which is deduced: the drawing of a particular truth from a general,
antecedently known, as distinguished from _Induction_, rising from
particular truths to a general; (2) the act of deducting: that which is
deducted: abatement.--_adj._ DEDUCT'IVE, that is, or that may be, deduced
from premises or accepted principles.--_adv._ DEDUCT'IVELY. [L.
_deduc[)e]re_, _deductum_--_de_, from _duc[)e]re_, _ductum_, to lead.]

DEE, d[=e], _v.i._ Scotch for _die_.

DEED, d[=e]d, _n._ something done: an act: an exploit: a legal transaction:
the written evidence of it.--_adj._ DEED'FUL (_Tenn._), marked by deeds or
exploits.--_adv._ DEED'ILY.--_adjs._ DEED'LESS (_Shak._), not having
performed deeds; DEED'Y, industrious, active.--DEED OF SAYING (_Shak._),
performance of what has been said or promised.--IN DEED, in reality. [A.S.
_dæd_--_dón_, to do; Ger. _that_--_thun_, to do.]

DEED, d[=e]d, a Scotch form of _indeed_.

DEEM, d[=e]m, _v.t._ or _v.i._ to judge: to think: to believe.--_n._
(_Shak._) opinion.--_ns._ DEEM'STER, DEMP'STER, one who pronounces
judgment, a judge--esp. one of the two in the Isle of Man. [A.S. _déman_,
to form a judgment--_dóm_, doom.]

DEEP, d[=e]p, _adj._ extending far down or far from the outside: difficult
to understand: secret: wise and penetrating: cunning: very still: profound:
profoundly learned in a language: intense, heart-felt: sunk low: low or
grave: (of a road) encumbered with mud, sand, or ruts.--_adv._ in a deep
manner.--_n._ that which is deep: the sea: anything profound or
incomprehensible.--_adjs._ DEEP'-BROWED, of high intellectual powers;
DEEP'-DRAW'ING (of ships), requiring considerable depth to float in;
DEEP'-DRAWN; DEEP'-DYED, thorough-going, extreme--in a bad sense.--_v.t._
DEEP'EN, to make deeper in any sense: to increase.--_v.i._ to become
deeper.--_adjs._ DEEP'-FET (_Shak._), fetched or drawn from a depth;
DEEP'-LAID.--_adv._ DEEP'LY.--_adjs._ DEEP'-MOST, deepest; DEEP'-MOUTHED,
with deep voice.--_n._ DEEP'NESS.--_adjs._ DEEP'-READ, profoundly versed;
DEEP'-SEA, pertaining to the deeper parts of the sea; DEEP'-SEAT'ED, firmly
seated; DEEP'-TONED, having a deep tone. [A.S. _deóp_; Ger. _tief_. Cf.
DIP, DIVE.]

DEER, d[=e]r, _n._ a quadruped of several species, as the stag, reindeer,
&c.; in M. E., any kind of animal.--_ns._ DEER'-HAIR, heath club-rush;
DEER'-HERD; DEER'-HOUND; DEER'-LICK, a spot of salt ground whither deer
come to lick the earth; DEER'-MOUSE, a common name for several species of
American mice--so called from their agility; DEER'-NECK, a thin, ill-shaped
neck--of horses; DEER'-SKIN, the skin of the deer, or leather made
therefrom; DEER'-STALK'ER; DEER'-STALK'ING, the hunting of deer by
stalking, or stealing upon them unawares. [A.S. _deór_; Ger. _thier_, Dut.
_dier_; Ice. _dýr_. There is no connection with Gr. _th[=e]r_, L. _fera_, a
wild beast.]

DEFACE, de-f[=a]s', _v.t._ to destroy or mar the face or external
appearance of, to disfigure: to obliterate.--_n._ DEFACE'MENT, act of
defacing: injury to form or appearance: that which defaces.--_adv._
DEF[=A]'CINGLY. [O. Fr. _desfacer_--_des_ = L. _dis_, away, _facies_,
face.]

DEFALCATE, de-fal'k[=a]t, _v.t._ to deduct a part of, of money, &c.: to
embezzle money held on trust.--_ns._ DEFALC[=A]'TION, a diminution: a
misappropriation of funds entrusted to one; DEF'ALC[=A]TOR, a defaulter.
[Low L. _difalc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to cut away--L. _dis-_, off,
_falc[=a]re_, to cut--_falx_, _falcis_, a sickle.]

DEFAME, de-f[=a]m', _v.t._ to take away or destroy the good fame or
reputation of: to speak evil of: to charge falsely.--_n._ (_Spens._)
infamy.--_n._ DEFAM[=A]'TION, the act of defaming: calumny:
slander.--_adv._ DEFAM'ATORILY.--_adj._ DEFAM'ATORY, containing defamation:
injurious to reputation: calumnious.--_p.adj._ DEF[=A]'MING. [O. Fr.
_defamer_--L. _diffam[=a]re_--_dis_, away, _fama_, report.]

DEFAULT, de-fawlt', _n._ a fault, failing, or failure: defect: neglect to
do what duty or law requires: failure to account for money entrusted to
one's charge: offence.--_v.i._ to fail through neglect of duty: to fail to
appear in court when called upon.--_n._ DEFAULT'ER, one who fails to appear
in court, or to account for money entrusted to his care, or to settle a
debt of honour.--JUDGMENT BY DEFAULT, judgment given against a person
because he fails to plead or make an appearance in court. [O. Fr. _defaute_
and _default_--_de_ = L. _dis_, apart, and _faute_.]

DEFEASANCE, de-f[=e]z'ans, _n._ undoing: defeat.--_adjs._ DEFEAS'ANCED,
liable to be forfeited; DEFEAS'IBLE, that may be defeated or
annulled.--_n._ DEFEAS'IBLENESS.--DEED OF DEFEAS'ANCE (_Eng. law_), an
instrument which defeats the operation of some other deed or estate; and
that which in the same deed is called a condition, in a separate deed is a
defeasance. [O. Fr. _defaisance_--_defaire_, to undo.]

DEFEAT, de-f[=e]t', _v.t._ to frustrate: to ruin.--_n._ a frustration of
plans: ruin: overthrow, as of an army in battle.--_n._ DEFEAT'URE
(_Spens._), defeat: disfigurement, disguise. [O. Fr. _defait_, _defaire_,
to undo--L. _dis_, neg. _fac[)e]re_, to do.]

DEFECATE, def'e-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to clear from dregs or impurities: to purify
from extraneous matter.--_v.i._ to void excrement.--_n._ DEFEC[=A]'TION.
[L. _defæc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to cleanse--_de_, from, _fæx_, _fæcis_,
dregs.]

DEFECT, de-fekt', _n._ a deficiency: a want: imperfection: blemish:
fault.--_n._ DEFECTIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ DEFECT'IBLE, liable to imperfection:
deficient.--_ns._ DEFEC'TION, a failure, a falling away from duty: revolt;
DEFEC'TIONIST.--_adj._ DEFEC'TIVE, having defect: wanting in some necessary
quality: imperfect: faulty: insufficient.--_adv._ DEFECT'IVELY.--_n._
DEFECT'IVENESS.--THE DEFECTS OF ONE'S QUALITIES, virtues carried to excess,
the faults apt to accompany or flow from good qualities. [L. _defic[)e]re_,
_defectum_, to fail--_de_, down, and _fac[)e]re_, to do.]

DEFENCE, de-fens', _n._ a defending: protection: vindication: (_law_) a
defendant's plea.--_pa.p._ DEFENC'ED (_B._), fortified.--_adj._
DEFENCE'LESS.--_adv._ DEFENCE'LESSLY.--_n._ DEFENCE'LESSNESS. [See DEFEND.]

DEFEND, de-fend', _v.t._ to keep off anything hurtful: to guard or protect:
to maintain against attack: (_obs._) to prohibit, forbid: (_law_) to
resist, as a claim: to contest.--_adj._ DEFEND'ABLE, that may be
defended.--_ns._ DEFEND'ANT, a defender: (_law_) a person accused or sued;
DEFENDEE', one who is defended; DEFEND'ER; DEFEN'SATIVE, a protection;
DEFENSIBIL'ITY.--_adjs._ DEFENS'IBLE, that may be defended; DEFENS'IVE,
DEFEN'SORY, serving to defend: in a state or posture of defence.--_n._ that
which defends: posture of defence.--_adv._ DEFENS'IVELY.--DEFENDER OF THE
FAITH, a title borne by the sovereigns of England since Henry VIII., on
whom it was conferred in 1521 for his book against Luther.--BE ON THE
DEFENSIVE, to be in the position to defend one's self. [L. _defend[)e]re_,
_defensum_, to ward off--_de_, off, and obs. _fend[)e]re_, to strike.]

DEFER, de-f[.e]r', _v.t._ to put off to another time: to delay:--_pr.p._
defer'ring; _pa.p._ deferred'.--_ns._ DEFER'MENT; DEFER'RER, a
procrastinator.--DEFERRED ANNUITY (see ANNUITY); DEFERRED PAY, an allowance
paid to soldiers on their discharge, or to their relations on their death;
DEFERRED SHARES, shares issued by a trading company, but not entitling the
holder to a full share of the profits of the company, and sometimes to none
at all, until the expiration of a specified time or the occurrence of some
event. [L. _differre_--_dis_, asunder, _ferre_, to bear, carry.]

DEFER, de-f[.e]r, _v.i._ to yield to the wishes or opinions of another, or
to authority.--_v.t._ to submit to or lay before:--_pr.p._ defer'ring;
_pa.p._ deferred'.--_n._ DEF'ERENCE, a deferring or yielding in judgment or
opinion: regard: submission.--_adj._ DEF'ERENT, bearing away, carrying
off.--_n._ a deferent duct (as opposed to an _afferent_ one) in the human
body.--_adj._ DEFEREN'TIAL, expressing deference or respect.--_adv._
DEFEREN'TIALLY. [L. _deferre_--_de_, down, and _ferre_, to bear.]

DEFERVESCENCE, de-fer-ves'ens, _n._ abatement of heat: coolness: decrease
of feverish symptoms.--Also DEFERVES'CENCY. [L. _defervesc[)e]re_, to cease
boiling--_de_, down, and _fervesc[)e]re_, from _ferv[=e]re_, to boil.]

DEFEUDALISE, d[=e]-f[=u]'dal-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of feudal character.

DEFFLY (_Spens._). For DEFTLY.

DEFIANCE, de-f[=i]'ans, _n._ the act of defying: a challenge to combat:
aggressiveness: contempt of opposition.--_adj._ DEF[=I]'ANT, full of
defiance, insolently bold.--_adv._ DEF[=I]'ANTLY.--_n._
DEF[=I]'ANTNESS.--_adj._ DEF[=I]'ATORY, bidding defiance.--BID DEFIANCE TO,
to defy.

DEFIBRINATE, de-f[=i]'bri-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of fibrine--also
DEF[=I]'BRINISE.--_n._ DEFIBRIN[=A]'TION.

DEFICIENT, de-fish'ent, _adj._ wanting.--_n._ DEFIC'IENCY (sometimes
DEFIC'IENCE), defect.--_adv._ DEFIC'IENTLY.--_ns._ DEFIC'IENTNESS;
DEF'ICIT, deficiency, esp. of revenue, as compared with expenditure. [L.,
_defic[)e]re_.]

DEFILE, d[=e]-f[=i]l', or d[=e]'f[=i]l, _v.i._ to march off in file or
line, or file by file.--_n._ a long narrow pass or way, in which troops can
march only in file, or with a narrow front.--_v.t._ DEFIL[=A]DE', to plan a
fortification so as to protect it from enfilading fire.--_n._ DEFILE'MENT.
[Fr. _défiler_--L. _dis_, and _filum_, a thread.]

DEFILE, de-f[=i]l', _v.t._ to pollute or corrupt: to violate.--_ns._
DEFILE'MENT, act of defiling: foulness; DEFIL'ER. [L. _de_, and A.S.
_fýlan_, _fúl_, foul.]

DEFILIATION, de-fil-i-[=a]'shun, _n._ depriving a parent of his child. [L.
_de_, neg., and _filius_, a son.]

DEFINE, de-f[=i]n', _v.t._ to fix the bounds or limits of: to determine
with precision: to describe accurately: to fix the meaning of.--_adj._
DEFIN'ABLE, that may be defined.--_n._ DEFINE'MENT (_Shak._),
description.--_adj._ DEF'INITE, defined: having distinct limits: fixed:
exact: clear.--_adv._ DEF'INITELY.--_ns._ DEF'INITENESS; DEFINI'TION, a
defining: a description of a thing by its properties: an explanation of the
exact meaning of a word, term, or phrase.--_adj._ DEFIN'ITIVE, defining or
limiting: positive: final.--_n._ (_gram._) an adjective used to limit the
signification of a noun.--_adv._ DEFIN'ITIVELY.--_ns._ DEFIN'ITIVENESS;
DEFIN'ITUDE, definitiveness. [Fr.,--L. _defin[=i]re_, _-[=i]tum_, to set
bounds to--_de_, _finis_, a limit.]

DEFLAGRATE, def'la-gr[=a]t, _v.i._ or _v.t._ to burn down: to burn
rapidly.--_ns._ DEFLAGRABIL'ITY, combustibility; DEFLAGR[=A]'TION;
DEF'LAGRATOR, a galvanic instrument for producing rapid combustion. [L.
_deflagr[=a]re_--_de_, down, _flagr[=a]re_, to burn.]

DEFLECT, de-flekt', _v.i._ or _v.t._ to turn aside: to swerve or deviate
from a right line or proper course.--_p.adj._ DEFLECT'ED (_bot._), bent
abruptly downward.--_ns._ DEFLEC'TION, DEFLEX'ION, deviation.--_adj._
DEFLEC'TIVE, causing deflection.--_n._ DEFLEC'TOR, a diaphragm in a lamp,
stove, &c., by which the flame and gases are brought together and the
combustion improved.--_v.t._ DEFLEX' (_zool._, _bot._), to bend
down.--_adj._ DEFLEXED'.--_n._ DEFLEX'URE, deviation. [L. _de_, from, and
_flect[)e]re_, _flexum_, to bend, turn.]

DEFLORATE, de-fl[=o]'r[=a]t, _adj._ past the flowering state, as an anther
after it has shed its pollen.--_n._ DEFLOR[=A]'TION, the act of
deflowering.

DEFLOWER, DEFLOUR, de-flowr', _v.t._ to deprive of flowers: to deprive of
grace and beauty: to ravish.--_n._ DEFLOW'ERER. [O. Fr. _deflorer_--Low L.
_deflor[=a]re_, to strip flowers off--L. _de_, neg., _flos_, _floris_, a
flower.]

DEFLUENT, def'l[=oo]-ent, _adj._ running down, decurrent.--_n._ DEFLUX'ION,
a discharge of fluid in the body. [L. _deflu[)e]re_--_de_, down,
_flu[)e]re_, _fluxum_, to flow.]

DEFOLIATE, de-f[=o]'li-[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of leaves.--_adjs._
DEF[=O]'LIATE, -D.--_ns._ DEFOLI[=A]'TION, the falling off of leaves: the
time of shedding leaves; DEF[=O]'LIATOR. [Low L. _defoli[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, off, _folium_, a leaf.]

DEFORCE, de-f[=o]rs', _v.t._ (_law_) to keep out of possession by force:
(_Scots law_) to resist an officer of the law in the execution of his
duty.--_ns._ DEFORCE'MENT; DEFORC'IANT, one who deforces; DEFORCI[=A]'TION,
a legal distress. [Fr. _de_ = L. _dis_, and _force_.]

DEFOREST, de-for'est, _v.t._ to disforest: to deprive of forests.--_n._
DEFOREST[=A]'TION.

DEFORM, de-form', _v.t._ to alter or injure the form of: to
disfigure.--_adj._ (_Milt._) hideous, unshapely.--_n._
DEFORM[=A]'TION.--_p.adj._ DEFORMED', misshapen.--_adv._
DEFORM'EDLY.--_ns._ DEFORMED'NESS; DEFORM'ER; DEFORM'ITY, state of being
deformed: want of proper form: ugliness: disfigurement: anything that
destroys beauty: an ugly feature or characteristic. [L. _deformis_,
ugly--_de_, from, _forma_, beauty.]

DEFOUL, de-fowl', _v.t._ to defile. [A.S. _fúl_, foul, whence by vowel
change of _ú_ to _ý_, _fýlan_.]

DEFRAUD, de-frawd', _v.t._ to deprive of by fraud: to withhold wrongfully:
to cheat or deceive.--_ns._ DEFRAUD'MENT, DEFRAUD[=A]'TION. [L.
_defraud[=a]re_--_de_, from, and _fraus_, _fraudis_, fraud.]

DEFRAY, de-fr[=a]', _v.t._ to discharge the expenses of anything: to pay:
(_Spens._) to appease:--_pr.p._ defray'ing; _pa.p._ defrayed'.--_ns._
DEFRAY'MENT, DEFRAY'AL. [O. Fr. _defrayer_--_de_, and _frais_, expense--Low
L. _fractum_, breakage, damage, expense.]

DEFT, deft, _adj._ handy, clever.--_adv._ DEFT'LY.--_n._ DEFT'NESS. [M. E.
_defte_, _dafte_, simple, meek; A.S. _ge-dæfte_, meek--_dæftan_,
_gedæftan_, prepare, make fit; the stem appears in _ge-daf-en_, to fit.]

DEFUNCT, de-funkt', _adj._ having finished the course of life, dead.--_n._
a dead person.--_n._ DEFUNC'TION (_Shak._), death.--_adj._ DEFUNC'TIVE
(_Shak._), pertaining to the dead. [L. _defungi_, _defunctus_, to
finish--_de_, and _fungi_, to perform.]

DEFY, de-f[=i]', _v.t._ to challenge: to brave: (_obs._) to discard,
dislike:--_pr.p._ defy'ing; _pa.p._ defied'.--_n._ (_Dryden_) a
defiance.--_n._ DEF[=I]'ER. [O. Fr. _defier_--Low L. _diffid[=a]re_, to
renounce faith or allegiance--L. _dis_, asunder, and _f[=i]d[)e]re_, to
trust--_f[)i]des_, faith.]

DÉGAGÉ, d[=a]-ga-zh[=a]', _adj._ unembarrassed, unconstrained, easy. [Pa.p.
of Fr. _dégager_, to disentangle.]

DEGAR'NISH = DISGARNISH (q.v.).

DEGENERATE, de-jen'[.e]r-[=a]t, _adj._ having departed from the high
qualities of race or kind: become base--also DEGEN'EROUS (_obs._).--_v.i._
to fall from a nobler state: to be or to grow worse.--_v.i._ DEGEN'DER
(_Spens._), to degenerate.--_ns._ DEGEN'ERACY, DEGENER[=A]'TION, the act or
process of becoming degenerate: the state of being degenerate.--_adv._
DEGEN'ERATELY.--_n._ DEGEN'ERATENESS.--_adj._ DEGEN'ERATING.--_n._
DEGENER[=A]'TIONIST, one who believes that the tendency of man is not to
improve, but to degenerate.--_adj._ DEGEN'ERATIVE, tending or causing to
degenerate. [L. _degener[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to depart from its kind--_de_,
from, down, _genus_, _gen[)e]ris_, kind.]

DEGERMINATOR, de-j[.e]r'mi-n[=a]-tor, _n._ an apparatus for splitting
grains and removing the germs. [L. _de_, neg., and _germen_, a germ.]

DEGLUTINATE, de-gl[=oo]'tin-[=a]t, _v.t._ to separate things that are glued
together by softening the glue:--_pr.p._ deglu'tin[=a]ting; _pa.p._
deglu'tin[=a]ted. [L. _deglutin[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, neg., and
_glutin[=a]re_--_gluten_, glue.]

DEGLUTITION, deg-l[=oo]-tish'un, _n._ the act or power of
swallowing.--_adjs._ DEGLU'TITIVE, DEGLU'TITORY. [Fr.,--L. _de_, down, and
_glut[=i]re_, to swallow. See GLUT.]

DEGRADE, de-gr[=a]d', _v.t._ to lower in grade or rank: to deprive of
office or dignity: to lower in character, value, or position: to
disgrace.--_n._ DEGRAD[=A]'TION, disgrace: degeneration: abortive
structural development: a lowering in dignity.--_p.adjs._ DEGRAD'ED,
reduced in rank: base: low: (_her._) placed on steps; DEGRAD'ING, debasing:
disgraceful. [Fr. _dégrader_--L. _de_, down, and _gradus_, a step. See
GRADE.]

DEGREE, de-gr[=e]', _n._ a grade or step: one of a series of advances:
relative position: rank: extent: a mark of distinction conferred by
universities, whether earned by examination or granted as a mark of honour:
the 360th part of a circle: 60 geographical miles: nearness of
relationship: comparative amount of guilt: one of the three stages
(_positive_, _comparative_, _superlative_) in the comparison of an
adjective or an adverb.--BY DEGREES, by little and little, gradually;
FORBIDDEN DEGREES, the degrees of consanguinity and affinity within which
it is not permitted to marry; SONGS OF DEGREES, or _Songs of ascents_,
Psalms cxx.-cxxxiv., either because sung by the Jews returning from
captivity, or by the Jews coming up annually to attend the feasts at
Jerusalem; TO A DEGREE, to a great degree, to an extreme. [Fr. _degré_--L.
_de_, _gradus_, a step.]

DEGUST, d[=e]-gust', _v.t._ to taste, to relish.--_v.i._ to have a
relishing taste.--_v.t._ DEGUST'[=A]TE (same as DEGUST).--_n._
DEGUST[=A]'TION, the act of tasting. [L. _de_, down, and _gust[=a]re_, to
taste.]

DEHISCE, d[=e]-his', _v.i._ to gape, to open as the capsules of a
plant.--_n._ DEHIS'CENCE.--_adj._ DEHIS'CENT. [L. _dehiscens_, pr.p. of
_dehisc[)e]re_--_de_, inten., and _hisc[)e]re_, to gape.]

DEHORT, de-hort', _v.t._ to exhort from, to dissuade.--_n._
DEHORT[=A]'TION, dissuasion.--_adjs._ DEHOR'TATIVE, DEHOR'TATORY,
dissuasive.--_n._ DEHORT'ER. [L. _dehort[=a]ri_--_de_, neg., and
_hort[=a]ri_, to exhort.]

DEHUMANISE, de-h[=u]'ma-n[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of specifically human
qualities. [L. _de_, neg., and _humanise_.]

DEHYDRATE, de-h[=i]'dr[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of water,
chemically.--_v.i._ to lose water.--_n._ DEHYDR[=A]'TION. [L. _de_, neg.,
Gr. _hyd[=o]r_.]

DEICIDE, d[=e]'i-s[=i]d, _n._ the killing of a god: the putting to death of
Jesus Christ. [From a supposed Low L. form _deicidium_--_deus_, a god, and
_cæd[)e]re_, to kill.]

DEICTIC, d[=i]k'tik, _adj._ proving directly.--_adv._ DEIC'TICALLY. [Gr.
_deiktikos_--_deiknynai_, to show.]

DEID-THRAW, d[=e]d'-thraw, _n._ (_Scot_.) death-throe.

DEIFY, d[=e]'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to exalt to the rank of a god: to worship as a
deity: to make god-like:--_pr.p._ d[=e]'ifying; _pa.p._
d[=e]'ified.--_adjs._--DEIF'IC, -AL, making god-like or divine.--_n._
DEIFIC[=A]'TION, the act of deifying: a deified embodiment.--_adj._
D[=E]'IFORM, god-like in form or character. [Fr. _déifier_--L.
_deific[=a]re_--_deus_, a god, and _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

DEIGN, d[=a]n, _v.i._ to condescend.--_v.t._ to give: to allow: (_obs._) to
favour. [Fr. _daigner_--L. _dign[=a]ri_, to think worthy--_dignus_,
worthy.]

DEIL, d[=e]l, Scotch form of _devil_.

DEINOTHERIUM, d[=i]-no-th[=e]'ri-um, _n._ = DINOTHERIUM.

DEIPAROUS, d[=e]-ip'a-rus, _adj._ bearing a god--of the Virgin. [L. _deus_,
a god, _par[)e]re_, to bring forth.]

DEIPNOSOPHIST, d[=i]p-nos'[=o]-fist, _n._ one who converses learnedly at
dinner, a table-philosopher--from the title of a work by Athenæus. [Gr.
_deipnon_, dinner, _sophist[=e]s_--_sophos_, wise.]

DEIST, d[=e]'ist, _n._ one who believes in the existence of God, but not in
revealed religion.--_n._ D[=E]'ISM, the creed of a deist.--_adjs._
DEIST'IC, -AL.--_adv._ DEIST'ICALLY. [Fr. _déiste_, _déisme_--L. _deus_, a
god.]

DEITY, d[=e]'i-ti, _n._ the divinity: godhead: a god or goddess: the
Supreme Being. [Fr.,--Low L. _deitas_--L. _deus_, god; Sans. _deva_--_div_,
to shine.]

DEJECT, de-jekt', _v.t._ to cast down the countenance or spirits
of.--_adj._ (_Shak._) cast down.--_adj._ DEJECT'ED, cast down:
dispirited.--_adv._ DEJECT'EDLY.--_ns._ DEJECT'EDNESS; DEJEC'TION, lowness
of spirits: (_pl._) fæcal discharge (also _dejecta_).--_adj._ DEJEC'TORY,
promoting evacuations. [L. _dejic[)e]re_, _-jectum_--_de_, down,
_jac[)e]re_, to cast.]

DELAINE, d[=e]-l[=a]n', _n._ an untwilled light dress material, originally
of wool--also _Muslin-de-laine_.

DELAPSE, d[=e]-laps', _v.i._ (_obs._) to sink down.--_n._ DELAP'SION.

DELATE, de-l[=a]t', _v.t._ to carry on: to publish: to charge with a
crime.--_ns._ DEL[=A]'TION; DELAT'OR. [L. _deferre_, _del[=a]tum_, to bring
a report against, to inform--_de_, inten., _ferre_, to bear.]

DELAY, de-l[=a]', _v.t._ to put off to another time: to defer: to hinder or
retard.--_v.i._ to pause, linger, or put off time.--_n._ a putting off or
deferring: a lingering: hinderance:--_pr.p._ delay'ing; _pa.p._
delayed'.--_n._ DELAY'ER.--_adv._ DELAY'INGLY. [O. Fr. _delaier_--L.
_differre_, _dil[=a]tum_--_dis_, apart, _ferre_, to carry.]

DELAY, de-l[=a]', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to temper, dilute, weaken. [Fr.
_délayer_, dilute--L. _deliqu[=a]re_, clarify.]

DELE, d[=e]'l[=e], _v.t._, delete, efface, a direction in proof-reading to
remove a superfluous letter or word, usually marked thus [Dele
symbol].--_adjs._ DEL'EBLE, DEL'IBLE, that can be deleted. [L., imper. of
_del[=e]re_, to delete.]

DELECTABLE, de-lekt'a-bl, _adj._ delightful: pleasing.--_n._
DELECT'ABLENESS.--_adv._ DELECT'ABLY.--_n._ DELECT[=A]'TION, delight.
[Fr.,--L. _delectabilis_--_delect[=a]re_, to delight.]

DELEGATE, del'e-g[=a]t, _v.t._ to send as a legate or representative: to
entrust or commit to.--_n._ one who is delegated: a deputy or
representative: (_U.S._) a person elected to represent a territory in
congress, as distinguished from the representatives of the States.--_adj._
delegated, deputed.--_ns._ DELEG[=A]'TION, DEL'EGACY, a delegating: the
persons delegated. [L. _de_, away, and _legare_, _-[=a]tum_, to send as
ambassador.]

DELETE, de-l[=e]t', _v.t._ to blot out: to erase: to destroy.--_n.pl._
DELEN'DA, things to be deleted or erased.--_n._ DEL[=E]'TION.--_adjs._
DEL[=E]'TIVE, DEL[=E]'TORY. [L. _del[=e]re_, _del[=e]tum_, to blot out.]

DELETERIOUS, del-e-t[=e]'ri-us, _adj._ tending to destroy life: hurtful or
destructive: poisonous.--_adv._ DELET[=E]'RIOUSLY.--_n._
DELET[=E]'RIOUSNESS. [Gr. _d[=e]l[=e]t[=e]rios_, hurtful--_deleisthai_, to
hurt.]

DELF, delf, _n._ a contraction for DELFT'WARE, a kind of earthenware
originally made at _Delft_, Holland.

DELF, delf, _n._ a drain, ditch: (_her._) a charge representing a square
sod. [A.S. _dælf_--_delfan_, to dig.]

DELIAN, d[=e]'li-an, _adj._ pertaining to _Delos_ in the Ægean Sea,
birthplace of Apollo and Artemis.

DELIBATE, del'i-b[=a]t, _v.t._ (_obs._) to sip.--_n._ DELIB[=A]'TION.

DELIBERATE, de-lib'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to weigh well in one's mind.--_v.i._
to consider the reasons for and against anything: to reflect: to
consider.--_adj._ well considered: considering carefully: slow in
determining: cautious.--_adv._ DELIB'ERATELY.--_ns._ DELIB'ERATENESS;
DELIBER[=A]'TION, the act of deliberating: mature reflection: calmness:
coolness.--_adj._ DELIB'ERATIVE, proceeding or acting by
deliberation.--_adv._ DELIB'ERATIVELY. [L. _deliber[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, inten., and _libr[=a]re_, to weigh--_libra_, a balance.]

DELICATE, del'i-k[=a]t, _adj._ pleasing to the senses, esp. the taste:
dainty: nicely discriminating or perceptive: of a fine, slight texture or
constitution: tender: frail, not robust: requiring nice handling: refined
in manners: gentle, polite, considerate: luxurious.--_n._ DEL'ICACY, state
or quality of being delicate: refinement: nicety: tenderness, weakness:
luxuriousness: anything delicate or dainty.--_adv._ DEL'ICATELY, in a
delicate manner: (_B._) luxuriously.--_n._ DEL'ICATENESS, state of being
delicate: (_B._) delicacy, luxury.--_n.pl._ DEL'ICATES (_B._), delicacies.
[L. _delic[=a]tus_--_deliciæ_, allurements, luxury--_delic[)e]re_--_de_,
inten., _lac[)e]re_, to entice.]

DELICE, del'is, _n._ (_Spens._) flower delice, the iris. [See
FLEUR-DE-LIS.]

DELICIOUS, de-lish'us, _adj._ full of delicacies: highly pleasing to the
senses: affording exquisite pleasure.--_n._ DEL'ICE, (_Spens._), delight: a
delight or delightful thing.--_adv._ DELI'CIOUSLY, in a delicious manner:
(_B._) luxuriously.--_n._ DELI'CIOUSNESS. [L. _deliciosus_--_deliciæ_.]

DELICT, de-likt', _n._ a transgression, a misdemeanour. [L. _delictum_, an
offence--_de_, and _linqu[)e]re_, to leave.]

DELIGATION, del-i-g[=a]'shun, _n._ a binding up, ligature.

DELIGHT, de-l[=i]t', _v.t._ to please highly.--_v.i._ to have or take great
pleasure: to be greatly pleased.--_n._ a high degree of pleasure: extreme
satisfaction: that which gives great pleasure.--_p.adj._ DELIGHT'ED,
greatly pleased: (_Shak._) delightful.--_adjs._ DELIGHT'FUL, DELIGHT'SOME,
full of delight.--_adv._ DELIGHT'FULLY.--_n._ DELIGHT'FULNESS.--_adj._
DELIGHT'LESS, affording no delight. [O. Fr. _deliter_--L. _delect[=a]re_,
inten. of _delic[)e]re_.]

DELILAH, d[=e]-l[=i]'la, _n._ the Philistine woman who befooled Samson: a
courtesan who seduces a man to betray secrets: a light woman,
strumpet.--Also DAL[=I]'LA.

DELIMIT, de-lim'it, _v.t._ to fix or mark the limit of.--_n._
DELIMIT[=A]'TION.

DELINEATE, de-lin'e-[=a]t, _v.t._ to mark out with lines: to represent by a
sketch or picture: to portray: to describe accurately in words.--_adj._
DELIN'EABLE.--_ns._ DELINE[=A]'TION, the act of delineating: a sketch,
representation, or description (sometimes DELIN'EAMENT); DELIN'EATOR. [L.
_deline[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, down, and _linea_, a line.]

DELINQUENT, de-ling'kwent, _adj._ failing in duty.--_n._ one who fails in
or leaves his duty: a transgressor: a criminal.--_n._ DELIN'QUENCY, failure
in or omission of duty: a fault: a crime.--_adv._ DELIN'QUENTLY. [L.
_delinquens_, _-entis_, pr.p. of _delinqu[)e]re_--_de_, inten., and
_linqu[)e]re_, to leave.]

DELIQUESCE, del-i-kwes', _v.i._ to melt and become liquid by absorbing
moisture, as certain salts, &c.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ DEL'IQUATE, DELIQ'UIATE,
to melt.--_ns._ DELIQUES'CENCE, DELIQUI[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DELIQUES'CENT,
liquefying in the air. [L. _deliquesc[)e]re_--_de_, inten.,
_liquesc[)e]re_, to become fluid--_liqu[=e]re_, to be fluid.]

DELIQUIUM, de-lik'wi-um, _n._ liquefaction by absorption of moisture.
[Fr.,--Low L. _deliquium_--L. _de_, down, and _liqu[=e]re_, to melt.]

DELIRIOUS, de-lir'i-us, _adj._ wandering in mind: light-headed:
insane.--_n._ DELIR[=A]'TION, madness, an aberration.--_adj._
DELIRIF[=A]'CIENT, producing delirium.--_n._ any substance with this
quality.--_adv._ DELIR'IOUSLY.--_ns._ DELIR'IOUSNESS; DELIR'IUM, state of
being delirious: strong excitement: wild enthusiasm.--DELIRIUM TREMENS, a
delirious disorder of the brain produced by excessive drinking, and often
marked by convulsive or trembling symptoms. [L. _delirus_, crazy--_de_,
from, and _lira_, a furrow; _tremens_, the pr.p. of _trem[)e]re_, to
tremble.]

DELITESCENT, del-i-tes'ent, _adj._ lying hid or concealed--e.g. the germs
of an infectious disease.--_n._ DELITES'CENCE. [L. _delitescens_, pr.p. of
_delitesc[)e]re_--_de_, from, and _latesc[)e]re_--_lat[=e]re_, to lie hid.]

DELIVER, de-liv'[.e]r, _v.t._ to liberate or set free from restraint or
danger: to rescue from evil or fear: to give up or part with: to
communicate: to pronounce: to give forth, as a blow, a ball, &c.: to
disburden a woman of a child in childbirth.--_adj._ DELIV'ERABLE.--_ns._
DELIV'ERANCE, act of delivering or freeing: act of transferring from one to
another: parturition: the utterance of a judgment or authoritative opinion;
DELIV'ERER; DELIV'ERY, the act of delivering: a giving up: the act or
manner of speaking in public, of discharging a shot, of throwing a
cricket-ball, of pouring water, &c.: the act of giving birth.--GENERAL
DELIVERY, the delivery of letters from a post-office window to the persons
to whom they are addressed--opp. to house to house delivery; GAOL, or JAIL,
DELIVERY (see GAOL). [Fr. _délivrer_--L. _de_, from, _liber[=a]re_, to set
free--_liber_, free.]

DELIVERLY, de-liv'[.e]r-li, _adv._ (_Shak._) nimble manner. [O. Fr.
_delivre_, free--L. _de_, and _liber_, free.]

DELL. See DALE.

DELLA-CRUSCAN, del-la-krus'kan, _adj._ belonging to, or resembling, the old
Florentine Accademia _della Crusca_ (1582), esp. of a group of sentimental
English poetasters resident in Florence about 1784--crushed by Gifford's
_Baviad_ in 1794.

DELLA-ROBBIA, del-la-rob'ya, _n._ a term applied to enamelled terra-cotta,
said to have been invented by Luca _della Robbia_.

DELPH, an erroneous spelling of DELF.

DELPHIAN, del'fi-an, _adj._ relating to _Delphi_, a town of ancient Greece,
or to the famous oracle which was there.--Also DEL'PHIC.

DELPHIN, del'fin, _adj._ pertaining to the _dauphin_ of France, or to an
edition of the Latin classics prepared for his use, 64 vols., 1674-1730.

DELPHINIDÆ, del-fin'i-d[=e], _n._ a family of cetaceans, including
dolphins, grampuses, &c. [L. _delphinus_, a dolphin.]

DELPHINIUM, del-fin'i-um, _n._ a genus of _Ranunculaceæ_ comprising the
larkspurs and stavesacre. [Formed from Gr. _delphinion_, larkspur.]

DELTA, del'ta, _n._ the fourth letter of the Greek alphabet, the capital
form of which is [Delta]: a tract of land of like shape formed at the mouth
of a river.--_n._ DELTAFIC[=A]'TION, the process of forming a
delta.--_adj._ DEL'TOID, of the form of the Greek [Delta]:
triangular.--DELTA METAL, a hard alloy of copper, zinc, and iron--the three
metals symbolised by the triangular shape; DELTOID MUSCLE, the large
triangular muscle of the shoulder. [Gr.,--Heb. _daleth_, a tent-door.]

DELUBRUM, de-l[=u]'brum, _n._ a temple, shrine, sanctuary: a church having
a font, a fort. [L.]

DELUCE. See FLEUR-DE-LIS.

DELUDE, de-l[=u]d', _v.t._ to play or impose upon: to deceive.--_adj._
DELUD'ABLE.--_n._ DELUD'ER. [L. _delud[)e]re_, to play--_de_, down,
_lud[)e]re_, _lusum_, to play.]

DELUGE, del'[=u]j, _n._ a great overflow of water: a flood: esp. that in
the days of Noah.--_v.t._ to inundate: to overwhelm as with water.
[Fr.,--L. _diluvium_--_dilu[)e]re_--_dis_, away, _lu[)e]re_, to wash.]

DELUNDUNG, de-lun'dung, _n._ the weasel-cat of Java and Malacca, a small
carnivore akin to the civet.

DELUSION, de-l[=u]'zhun, _n._ the act of deluding: the state of being
deluded: a false belief: error.--_adj._ DEL[=U]'SIONAL, pertaining to
delusions, afflicted with such.--_n._ DEL[=U]'SIONIST.--_adjs._
DEL[=U]'SIVE, DEL[=U]'SORY, apt or tending to delude: deceptive.--_adv._
DEL[=U]'SIVELY.--_n._ DEL[=U]'SIVENESS. [See DELUDE.]

DELVE, delv, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to dig with a spade.--_n._ (_Spens._) a
place dug out, a ditch, a cave.--_n._ DELV'ER. [A.S. _delfan_, to dig;
conn. with _dale_, _dell_.]

DEMAGNETISE, de-mag'net-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of magnetic power.--_n._
DEMAGNETIS[=A]'TION.

DEMAGOGUE, dem'a-gog, _n._ a leader of the people: a popular and factious
orator.--_adjs._ DEMAGOGIC, -AL (-goj').--_ns._ DEMAGOGISM, DEMAGOGUISM
(dem'a-gog-ism); DEM'AGOGUERY, DEMAGOGY (-goj'). [Fr.,--Gr.
_d[=e]mog[=o]gos_--_d[=e]mos_, the people, _agogos_, leading--_agein_, to
lead.]

DEMAIN. See DEMESNE.

DEMAND, d[=e]-mand', _v.t._ to claim: to ask earnestly or authoritatively:
to call for: to question.--_n._ the asking for what is due: an asking for
with authority: a claim: earnest inquiry.--_adj._ DEMAND'ABLE, that may be
demanded.--_n._ DEMAND'ANT, one who demands: a plaintiff:--_fem._
DEMAND'RESS.--IN GREAT DEMAND, much sought after. [Fr.,--Low L.
_demand[=a]re_, to demand--L. _de_, from, and _mand[=a]re_, to put into
one's charge.]

DEMARCATION, DEMARKATION, de-mark-[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of marking off or
setting bounds to: division: a fixed limit.--_v.t._ DEMAR'CATE, to mark off
or limit. [Fr.,--_dé_, off, and _marquer_, to mark. See MARK.]

DEMATERIALISE, d[=e]-ma-t[=e]'ri-al-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of material
qualities.

DEME, d[=e]m, _n._ a subdivision of ancient Attica and of modern Greece, a
township: (_biol._) any differentiated aggregate of cells. [Gr.
_d[=e]mos_.]

DEMEAN, de-m[=e]n', _v.t._ to conduct (with _self_): to behave.--_n._
DEMEANOUR, conduct--(_Spens._) DEMAYNE, DEMEASNURE. [O. Fr.
_demener_--_de_, inten., and _mener_, to lead--Low L. _min[=a]re_, to drive
cattle, L. _min[=a]ri_, to threaten.]

DEMEAN, de-m[=e]n', _v.t._ to make mean: to lower. [More prob. on the
analogy of _debase_, from _de_, and _mean_, low, than the same word as the
preceding with specialised sense.]

DEMENT, de-ment', _v.t._ to drive crazy, render insane.--_adj._ insane,
demented.--_n._ a demented person.--_v.t._ DEMENT'[=A]TE, to
dement.--_p.adj._ DEMENT'ED, out of one's mind: insane: suffering from
dementia. [L. _demens_, _dementis_, out of one's mind--_de_, from, and
_mens_, the mind.]

DÉMENTI, d[=a]-mong-t[=e], _n._ a contradiction. [Fr. _démentir_, to give
the lie to.]

DEMENTIA, de-men'shi-a, _n._ general mental enfeeblement, with loss of
memory, reason, feeling, and will: often the consequence of acute mania.
[L. _de_, neg., and _mens_, _mentis_, mind.]

DEMERIT, de-mer'it, _n._ ill-desert: fault: crime. [O. Fr. _demerite_,
desert, also a fault--Low L. _demeritum_, a fault, _demer[=e]re_, to
deserve--L. _de_, fully, _mer[=e]re_, to deserve.]

DEMERSED, d[=e]-merst', _adj._ (_bot._) growing under water.--_n._
DEMER'SION.

DEMESMERISE, de-mes'mer-[=i]z, _v.t._ to relieve from mesmeric
influence.--_n._ DEMESMERIS[=A]'TION.

DEMESNE, de-m[=e]n', DEMAIN, de-m[=a]n', _n._ a manor-house, with lands
adjacent to it not let out to tenants: any estate in land. [Forms of
_domain_.]

DEMI-BASTION, dem'i-bast'yun, _n._ a kind of half-bastion, consisting of
one face and one flank. [Fr. _demi_--L. _dimidius_, half, and _bastion_.]

DEMI-CADENCE, dem'i-k[=a]'dens, _n._ (_mus._) a half-cadence.

DEMI-CANNON, dem'i-kan'un, _n._ (_Shak._) an old gun which threw a ball of
from 30 to 36 lbs.

DEMI-CULVERIN, dem'i-cul've-rin, _n._ an old kind of cannon which threw a
shot of 9 or 10 lbs.

DEMI-DEIFY, dem'i-d[=e]'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to treat as a demi-god.

DEMI-DEVIL, dem'i-dev'il, _n._ a half-devil.

DEMI-DISTANCE, dem'i-dis'tans, _n._ (_fort._) the distance between the
outward polygons and the flank.

DEMI-DITONE, dem'i-d[=i]-t[=o]n, _n._ (_mus._) a minor third.

DEMIGOD, dem'i-god, _n._ half a god: one whose nature is partly divine,
esp. a hero fabled to be the offspring of a god and a mortal:--_fem._
DEM'I-GODD'ESS. [Fr. _demi_, half, and _god_.]

DEMI-GORGE, dem'i-gorj, _n._ (_fort._) the part of the polygon remaining
after the flank is raised, going from the curtain to the angle of the
polygon.

DEMI-JOHN, dem'i-jon, _n._ a glass bottle with a full body and narrow neck,
enclosed in wicker-work. [Fr. _dame-jeanne_, Dame Jane, analogous to
_Bellarmine_, _gray-beard_. Not from the town _Damaghan_.]

DEMI-LANCE, dem'i-lans, _n._ a short, light spear of the 16th century; a
soldier armed with such a weapon.

DEMI-LUNE, dem'i-l[=oo]n, _n._ (_fort._) a half-moon: an old name for
_Ravelin_. [L. _demi_, half, and Fr. _lune_--L. _luna_, the moon.]

DEMI-MONDE, dem'i-mond, _n._ women in an equivocal position, kept women:
the prostitute class generally.

DEMIREP, dem'i-rep, _n._ a woman of dubious reputation.--_n._ DEM'IREPDOM,
shady women collectively. [Said to be a contraction of _demi-reputation_.]

DEMISE, d[=e]-m[=i]z', _n._ a transferring: death, esp. of a sovereign or a
distinguished person: a transfer of the crown or of an estate to a
successor.--_v.t._ to send down to a successor: to bequeath by
will.--_adj._ DEM[=I]'SABLE. [O. Fr. _demise_, pa.p. of _desmettre_, to lay
down--L. _dimitt[)e]re_, to send away--L. _dis_, aside, and _mitt[)e]re_,
_missum_, to send.]

[Illustration]

DEMI-SEMIQUAVER, dem'i-sem'i-kw[=a]-v[.e]r, _n._ (_mus._) a note equal in
time to the half of a semiquaver. [Fr. _demi_, half, and _semiquaver_.]

DEMISS, de-mis', _adj._ (_Spens._) humble. [L. _demissus_, pa.p. of
_demitt[)e]re_. See DEMISE.]

DEMISSION, de-mish'un, _n._ a lowering: degradation: depression:
relinquishment: resignation.--_adj._ DEMISS'IVE (_obs._), humble.--_adv._
DEMISS'LY. [L. _demission-em_. See DEMISE.]

DEMIT, de-mit', _v.t._ to dismiss: to relinquish: to resign. [See DEMISE.]

DEMIURGE, dem'i-urj, _n._ the maker of the world: among the Gnostics, the
creator of the world and of man, subordinate to God the supreme--also
DEMIUR'GUS.--_adj._ DEMIUR'GIC. [Gr. _d[=e]miourgos_--_d[=e]mos_, the
people, and _ergon_, a work.]

DEMI-VOLT, dem'i-volt, _n._ a half-turn of a horse, the forelegs being
raised in the air. [Fr. _demi-volte_--_demi_, half, and _volte_, a leap.
See VAULT.]

DEMI-WOLF, dem'i-woolf, _n._ (_Shak._) a half-wolf, the offspring of a dog
and a wolf.

DEMOBILISE, de-mob'il-[=i]z, _v.t._ to take out of mobilisation: to
disband.--_n._ DEMOBILIS[=A]'TION. [Fr.]

DEMOCRACY, de-mok'ra-si, _n._ a form of government in which the supreme
power is vested in the people collectively, and is administered by them or
by officers appointed by them: the people, esp. the common people in the
United States, the democratic party--also DEMOC'RATY (_Milt._).--_n._
DEM'OCRAT, one who adheres to or promotes democracy as a principle: a
member of the democratic party in the United States, who preserve carefully
the local liberties of states and of individuals, opposing national
centralisation, and supporting a wide franchise, low tariff duties for the
interests of the revenue rather than protection, and a limited public
expenditure.--_adjs._ DEMOCRAT'IC, -AL, relating to democracy: insisting on
equal rights and privileges for all.--_adv._ DEMOCRAT'ICALLY.--_adj._
DEMOCRATIF[=I]'ABLE, capable of being made democratic.--_v.t._
DEMOCRATISE', to render democratic.--_n._ DEMOC'RATIST, a democrat. [O.
Fr.,--Gr. _d[=e]mokratia_--_d[=e]mos_, the people, and _kratein_, to
rule--_kratos_, strength.]

DEMOGORGON, d[=e]-mo-gor'gon, _n._ a mysterious deity or diabolical
magician first mentioned about 450 A.D., and regarded as an object of
terror. [Gr. _daim[=o]n_, deity, _gorgos_, terrible.]

DEMOGRAPHY, d[=e]-mog'ra-fi, _n._ vital and social statistics, as applied
to the study of nations and races.--_n._ DEMOG'RAPHER.--_adj._
DEMOGRAPH'IC. [Gr. _d[=e]mos_, the people, _graphein_, to write.]

DEMOISELLE, dem-wa-zel', _n._ (_Shak._) a young lady: a crane-like bird of
peculiarly graceful form. [Fr. See DAMSEL.]

DEMOLISH, de-mol'ish, _v.t._ to destroy, lay in ruins, to ruin.--_n._
DEMOLI'TION, act of pulling down: ruin. [Fr. _démolir_--L. _demol[=i]ri_,
to throw down--_de_, down, and _mol[=i]ri_, to build--_moles_, a heap.]

DEMOLOGY, de-mol'o-j[=i], _n._ same as DEMOGRAPHY: the theory of the origin
and development of nations. [Gr. _d[=e]mos_, the people, _logia_, a
discourse.]

DEMON, d[=e]'mon, _n._ an evil spirit, a devil: sometimes like DÆMON, a
friendly spirit or good genius:--_fem._ D[=E]'MONESS.--_adjs._
DEM[=O]'NIAC, DEM[=O]N[=I]'ACAL, pertaining to or like demons or evil
spirits: influenced by demons.--_ns._ DEM[=O]'NIAC, a human being possessed
by a demon or evil spirit.--_adv._ DEMON[=I]'ACALLY.--_n._ DEMON[=I]'ACISM,
state of being a demoniac.--_adj._ DEM[=O]'NIAN (_Milt._).--_ns._
DEM[=O]'NIANISM, DEM[=O]'NIASM, possession by a demon.--_v.t._
D[=E]'MONISE, to convert into a demon: to control or possess by a
demon.--_ns._ D[=E]'MONISM, a belief in demons; D[=E]'MONIST, a believer in
demons; DEMONOC'RACY, the power of demons; DEMONOL'ATRY, the worship of
demons; DEMONOL'ATER, one who worships such; DEMONOLOGY, an account of, or
the study of, demons and their agency.--_adjs._ DEMONOLOG'IC, -AL.--_ns._
DEMONOL'OGIST, a writer on demonology; DEMONOM[=A]'NIA, a form of mania in
which the subject believes himself possessed by devils; DEMON'OMY, the
dominion of demons; D[=E]'MONRY, demoniacal influence. [L. _dæmon_--Gr.
_daim[=o]n_, a spirit, genius; in N. T. and Late Greek, a devil.]

DEMONETISE, d[=e]-mon'e-t[=i]z, _n._ to divest of value as money.--_n._
DEMONETIS[=A]'TION.

DEMONSTRATE, de-mon'str[=a]t, _v.t._ to show or point out clearly: to prove
with certainty.--_adj._ DEMON'STRABLE, that may be demonstrated.--_ns._
DEMON'STRABLENESS, DEMONSTRABIL'ITY.--_adv._ DEMON'STRABLY.--_ns._
DEMONSTR[=A]'TION, a pointing out: proof beyond doubt: expression of the
feelings by outward signs: expression of sympathy with political or social
opinions, with a man or body of men, by a mass-meeting, a procession, &c.:
show: a movement of troops or ships to exhibit military intention, or in
war to deceive the enemy.--_adj._ DEMON'STRATIVE, making evident: proving
with certainty: of the nature of proof: given to the manifestation of one's
feelings.--_adv._ DEMON'STRATIVELY.--_ns._ DEMON'STRATIVENESS;
DEM'ONSTRATOR, one who proves beyond doubt: one who teaches: (_anat._) one
who teaches anatomy from the dissected parts.--_adj._ DEMON'STRATORY,
demonstrative. [L. _demonstr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, inten., and
_monstr[=a]re_, to show.]

DEMORALISE, de-mor'al-[=i]z, _v.t._ to corrupt in morals: to lower the
_morale_--that is, to deprive of spirit and confidence: to throw into
confusion.--_n._ DEMORALIS[=A]'TION, act of demoralising: corruption or
subversion of morals.--_p.adj._ DEMORAL[=I]S'ING.

DEMOS, d[=e]'mos, _n._ the people, esp. the lower classes.--_adj._
DEMOT'IC, pertaining to the people: popular: in Egypt. ant., of a kind of
writing distinguished from the hieratic, or priestly, and from
hieroglyphics. [Gr.]

DEMOSTHENIC, de-mos-then'ik, _adj._ of or like _Demosthenes_, the Athenian
orator: eloquent.

DEMPSTER. Same as DEEMSTER (q.v. under DEEM).

DEMPT, demt (_Spens._). _Pa.p._ of DEEM.

DEMULCENT, de-mul'sent, _adj._ soothing. [L. _demulcent-em_--_de_, and
_mulc[=e]re_, to stroke, to soothe.]

DEMUR, de-mur', _v.i._ to hesitate from uncertainty or before difficulty:
to object:--_pr.p._ demur'ring; _pa.p._ demurred'.--_n._ a stop: pause,
hesitation.--_adj._ DEMUR'RABLE.--_ns._ DEMUR'RAGE, an allowance made for
undue delay or detention of a vessel in port: compensation paid by the
freighter to the owner of the same: allowance for undue detention of
railway-wagons, &c.; DEMUR'RER, one who demurs: (_law_) a plea in law that,
even if the opponent's facts are as he says, they yet do not support his
case. [Fr. _demeurer_--L. _demor[=a]ri_, to loiter, linger--_de_, inten.,
and _mor[=a]ri_, to delay--_mora_, delay.]

DEMURE, de-m[=u]r', _adj._ sober: staid: modest: affectedly modest: making
a show of gravity.--_adv._ DEMURE'LY.--_n._ DEMURE'NESS. [O. Fr. _de (bons)
murs_, of good manners--L. _de_, of, _mores_, manners.]

DEMY, de-m[=i]', _n._ a size of paper 22½ by 17½ in.; in the United States
21 by 16 in. [Fr. _demi_--L. _dimidium_, half--_di_, apart, _medius_, the
middle.]

DEMY, de-m[=i]', _n._ a holder of certain scholarships in Magdalen College,
Oxford.--_n._ DEMY'SHIP. [Ety. same as above.]

DEN, den, _n._ the hollow lair of a wild beast: a kind of pit, a cave: a
haunt of vice or misery: (_coll._) a private retreat for work: (_prov._) a
narrow valley.--_v.i._ to retire to a den. [A.S. _denn_, a cave, and
_denu_, a valley.]

DEN, den, _n._ (_obs._) for good-e'en, good-even.

DENARY, den'ar-i, _adj._ containing ten.--_n._ the number ten.--_n._
DEN[=A]'RIUS, the chief Roman silver coin under the Republic, divided into
ten asses, and worth 9-2/5d. [L. _denarius_--_deni_--_decem_, ten.]

DENATIONALISE, de-nash'un-al-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of national
rights.--_n._ DENATIONALIS[=A]'TION.

DENATURALISE, de-nat'[=u]-ral-[=i]z, _v.t._ to make unnatural; to deprive
of naturalisation.

DENAY, de-n[=a]', _obs._ form of DENY, DENIAL.

DENDRACHATE, den'dra-k[=a]t, _n._ arborescent agate.--MOSS'-AG'ATE. [Gr.
_dendron_, tree, _achat[=e]s_, agate.]

DENDRIFORM, den'dri-form, _adj._ having the appearance of a tree. [Formed
from Gr. _dendron_, a tree, and L. _forma_, form.]

DENDRITE, den'dr[=i]t, _n._ a mineral in which are figures resembling
plants.--_adjs._ DENDRIT'IC, -AL, tree-like, arborescent: marked with
branching figures like plants. [Gr. _dendrit[=e]s_, of a tree--_dendron_, a
tree.]

DENDRODONT, den'dr[=o]-dont, _n._ a fish of extinct fossil genus
_Dendrodus_, having teeth of dendritic structure.--_adj._ having such
teeth.--_n._ DENDRODEN'TINE, the form of branched dentine seen in compound
teeth, produced by the interblending of the dentine, enamel, and cement.
[Gr. _dendron_, a tree, and _odous_, _odontos_, tooth.]

DENDROID, den'droid, _adj._ having the form of a tree. [Gr. _dendron_, a
tree, and _eidos_, form.]

DENDROLITE, den'dro-l[=i]t, _n._ a petrified or fossil plant. [Gr.
_dendron_, a tree, and _lithos_, a stone.]

DENDROLOGY, den-drol'o-ji, _n._ a treatise on trees: the natural history of
trees.--_adj._ DENDROLOG'ICAL.--_n._ DENDROL'OGIST. [Gr. _dendron_, a tree,
and _logia_, a discourse.]

DENDROMETER, d[.e]n-drom'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for ascertaining the
height of a tree. [Gr. _dendron_, tree, _metron_, measure.]

DENE, d[=e]n, _n._ a small valley.--_n._ DENE'-HOLE, an ancient artificial
excavation in the chalk formations of Kent and Essex. [A form of _dean_.
Cf. DEN.]

DENEGATION, d[=e]-ne-g[=a]'shun, _n._ denial. [L. _deneg[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_, to deny--_de_, inten., and _neg[=a]re_, to deny.]

DENGUE, deng'g[=a], _n._ an acute tropical epidemic fever, seldom
fatal--also _breakbone-fever_, _dandy-fever_. [The Spanish _dengue_,
refusing, prudery, from L. _deneg[=a]re_, to deny, seems to have been
confused with _dandy-fever_.]

DENIAL, de-n[=i]'al, _n._ act of denying or saying no: contradiction:
refusal: rejection.--_adj._ DEN[=I]'ABLE, that may be denied.--_n._
DEN[=I]'ER, one who denies.

DENIER, de-n[=e]r', _n._ (_Shak._) an old small French silver coin: also
later, a copper coin of the value of 1/12 sou--hence a very trifling sum.
[Fr.,--L. _denarius_.]

DENIGRATION, de-ni-gr[=a]'shun, _n._ a making or becoming black--esp. the
blackening of a man's character.--_v.t._ DEN'IGRATE (_obs._). [L. _de_,
inten., _nigr[=a]re_, to blacken, _niger_, black.]

DENIM, den'im, _n._ coloured twilled cotton goods for overalls, &c.

DENITRATE, d[=e]-n[=i]'tr[=a]t, _v.t._ to free from nitric acid.--_ns._
DENITR[=A]'TION; DEN[=I]'TRIFICATOR.

DENIZEN, den'i-zn, _n._ an inhabitant (human or animal): one admitted to
the rights of a citizen.--_v.t._ to make a denizen of: to provide with
occupants.--_v.i._ to inhabit.--_ns._ DENIZ[=A]'TION, act of making one a
citizen; DEN'IZENSHIP. [O. Fr. _deinzein_--_deinz_, _dens_ (Fr. _dans_),
within--L. _de intus_, from within.]

DENNET, den'et, _n._ a light gig.

DENOMINATE, d[=e]-nom'in-[=a]t, _v.t._ to give a name to: to call.--_adj._
DENOM'INABLE.--_n._ DENOMIN[=A]'TION, the act of naming: a name or title: a
collection of individuals called by the same name: a sect.--_adj._
DENOMIN[=A]'TIONAL, belonging to a denomination or sect.--_n._
DENOMIN[=A]'TIONALISM, a denominational or class spirit or policy: devotion
to the interests of a sect.--_adj._ DENOM'INATIVE, giving or having a
title.--_adv._ DENOM'INATIVELY.--_n._ DENOM'INATOR, he who, or that which,
gives a name: (_arith._) the lower number in a vulgar fraction, which names
the parts into which the integer is divided. [L. _de_, and _nomin[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_, to name--_nomen_, a name.]

DENOTE, d[=e]-n[=o]t', _v.t._ to note or mark off: to indicate by a sign:
to signify or mean: (_log._) to indicate the objects comprehended in a
class.--_adj._ DEN[=O]'TABLE.--_n._ DENOT[=A]'TION, that which a word names
or indicates, in contradistinction to that which it _connotes_ or
signifies.--_adj._ DEN[=O]'TATIVE.--_adv._ DEN[=O]'TATIVELY.--_n._
DEN[=O]TE'MENT (_Shak._), a sign or indication. [Fr.,--L. _denot[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, inten., and _not[=a]re_, to mark--_nota_, a mark or
sign.]

DÉNOUEMENT, d[=a]-n[=oo]'mong, _n._ the unravelling of a plot or story: the
issue, event, or outcome. [Fr. _dénouement_ or _dénoûment_; _dénouer_, to
untie--_de_, neg., and _nouer_, to tie--L. _nodus_, a knot.]

DENOUNCE, de-nowns', _v.t._ to inform against or accuse publicly: (_U.S._)
to claim the right of working a mine, as being abandoned or insufficiently
worked.--_ns._ DENOUNCE'MENT (same as DENUNCIATION); DENOUNC'ER. [Fr.
_dénoncer_--L. _denunti[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and _nunti[=a]re_, to
announce.]

DENSE, dens, _adj._ thick, close, compact: impenetrably stupid.--_n._ a
thicket.--_adv._ DENSE'LY.--_ns._ DENSE'NESS; DENS'ITY, the quality of
being dense: the proportion of mass to bulk or volume: the quantity of
matter per unit of bulk. [L. _densus_, thick.]

DENSIMETER, den-sim'et-[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for ascertaining the
comparative density or specific gravity of a substance. [L. _densus_,
dense, and _metrum_ (Gr. _metron_), measure.]

DENT, dent, _n._ a small hollow made by the pressure or blow of a harder
body on a softer.--_v.t._ to make a mark by means of a blow.--_p.adj._
DENT'ED, marked with dents: indented. [A variant of _dint_.]

DENT, dent, _n._ a notch.--_v.t._ to notch. [Confused with the preceding,
but from Fr. _dent_, tooth--L. _dens_, _dentis_.]

DENTAGRA, den-tag'ra, _n._ a tooth-drawing forceps: toothache.

DENTAL, den'tal, _adj._ belonging to the teeth: produced by the aid of the
teeth.--_n._ an articulation or letter pronounced chiefly with the
teeth.--_adj._ DEN'TARY, belonging to dentition, bearing teeth.--_n._ the
distal element of the jaw of vertebrates below mammals.--DENTAL ENGINE, a
mechanical appliance giving a rotary motion to a dentist's boring
instruments. [L. _dens_, _dentis_, a tooth. See TOOTH.]

DENTATE, -D, den't[=a]t, -ed, _adj._ toothed: notched: set as with teeth.
[L. _dentatus_, toothed, _dens_, a tooth.]

DENTEL. See DENTIL.

DENTEX, den'teks, _n._ a voracious sparoid fish.

DENTICLE, den'ti-kl, _n._ a small tooth.--_adjs._ DENTIC'UL[=A]TE, -D,
having notches.--_n._ DENTICUL[=A]'TION. [L. _denticulus_, dim. of _dens_,
a tooth.]

DENTIFORM, den'ti-form, _adj._ having the form of a tooth or of teeth. [L.
_dens_, _dentis_, tooth, and _forma_, form.]

DENTIFRICE, den'ti-fris, _n._ a substance used in rubbing or cleaning the
teeth. [Fr.,--L. _dentifricium_, from _dens_, and _fric[=a]re_, to rub.]

DENTIGEROUS, den-tij'e-rus, _adj._ bearing teeth.

[Illustration]

DENTIL, den'til, _n._ a denticle: (_pl._) small square blocks or
projections in the bed-mouldings of the cornices of columns--also
DEN'TEL.--_adj._ DEN'TILATED. [See DENTICLE.]

DENTILINGUAL, den-ti-ling'-gwal, _adj._ formed between the teeth and the
tongue, as _th_ in _thin_, _this_.--_n._ a consonant so formed.--Also
DENTOLING'UAL. [L. _dent-_, _dens_, a tooth, _lingua_, the tongue.]

DENTINE, DENTIN, den'tin, _n._ the substance of which the tooth is formed,
under the enamel. [L. _dens_, _dentis_, a tooth.]

DENTIROSTRAL, den-ti-ros'tral, _adj._ having the mandibles of the beak
toothed or notched, as certain birds. [L. _dens_, _dentis_, a tooth, and
_rostrum_, a beak.]

DENTIST, den'tist, _n._ one who remedies diseases of the teeth, or inserts
artificial teeth.--_v.i._ DEN'TISE, to cut one's teeth.--_ns._ DEN'TISTRY,
the business of a dentist; DENTI'TION, the cutting or growing of teeth: the
conformation, number, and arrangement of the teeth.

DENTOID, den'toid, _adj._ formed or shaped like a tooth. [L. _dens_,
_dentis_, a tooth, and Gr. _eidos_, form.]

DENTOLINGUAL. See DENTILINGUAL.

DENUDE, de-n[=u]d', _v.t._ to make nude or naked: to lay bare.--_n._
DENUD[=A]'TION, a making nude or bare: (_geol._) the wearing away of rocks
by water and atmospheric action, whereby the underlying rocks are laid
bare. [L. _denud[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and _nud[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to make
naked--_nudus_, naked.]

DENUNCIATE, de-nun'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ same as DENOUNCE.--_ns._ DENUNCIATION
(-shi-[=a]'-, or -si-[=a]'-), any formal declaration: act of denouncing: a
threat; DENUN'CIATOR, one who denounces.--_adj._ DENUN'CIATORY, containing
a denunciation: threatening.

DENY, de-n[=i]', _v.t._ to gainsay or declare not to be true: to reject: to
refuse admission to: to disown:--_pr.p._ deny'ing; _pa.p._ denied'.--_adv._
DENY'INGLY.--DENY ONE'S SELF, to deny one's self the indulgence of bodily
appetites and carnal inclinations: to exercise self-denial. [Fr.
_denier_--L. _deneg[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and _neg[=a]re_, to say no. See
NEGATION.]

DEOBSTRUENT, de-ob'str[=oo]-ent, _adj._ (_med._) removing obstructions.

DEODAND, d[=e]'o-dand, _n._ in old English law, a personal chattel which
had been the immediate, accidental cause of the death of a human being,
forfeited to the crown for pious uses. [L. _deo_, to God, _dandum_, that
must be given--_d[)a]re_, to give.]

DEODAR, de-o-där', _n._ a cedar much praised by Indian poets: the _Cedrus
Deodara_ of the Himalayas. [Sans. _Deva-d[=a]ru_, divine tree--a name given
to various coniferous trees growing in sacred places.]

DEODATE, d[=e]'[=o]-d[=a]t, _n._ a gift from God. [L. _deo_, to God,
_datum_, given part, pa.p. of _d[)a]re_, to give.]

DEODORISE, d[=e]-[=o]'dor-[=i]z, _v.t._ to take the odour or smell
from.--_ns._ DEODORIS[=A]'TION; DE[=O]'DORISER, a substance that destroys
or conceals unpleasant smells.

DEONTOLOGY, d[=e]-on-tol'[=o]-ji, _n._ the science of duty, ethics.--_adj._
DEONTOLOG'ICAL.--_n._ DEONTOL'OGIST.

DEOPPILATE, d[=e]-op'i-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to free from obstruction.--_n._
DEOPPIL[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DEOP'PILATIVE.

DEOXIDATE, de-oks'i-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to take oxygen from, or reduce from the
state of an oxide--also DEOX'IDISE.--_ns._ DEOXID[=A]'TION; DEOXID[=I]'SER,
a substance that deoxidises.

DEOXYGENATE, de-oks-ij'en-[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of oxygen.--Also
DEOXY'GENISE.

DEOZONISE, de-[=o]-z[=o]n'[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of ozone.

DEPAINT, de-p[=a]nt', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to paint: depict.

DEPART, de-pärt', _v.i._ to go away: to quit or leave: to die: (_obs._) to
separate from one another.--_v.t._ (_obs._) to separate, divide.--_ns._
DEPART'ER; DEPART'ING; DEPART'URE, act of departing: a going away from a
place: deviation: the distance in nautical miles made good by a ship due
east or west: death.--A NEW DEPARTURE, a change of purpose or method, a new
course of procedure.--THE DEPARTED, the deceased. [Fr. _départir_--L. _de_,
from, and _part[=i]ri_, to part, to divide.]

DEPARTMENT, de-pärt'ment, _n._ a part: a separate part of business or duty:
a section of the administration: a division of a country, esp. of
France.--_adj._ DEPARTMENT'AL.--_adv._ DEPARTMENT'ALLY.

DEPASTURE, de-pas't[=u]r, _v.t._ to eat bare.--_v.i._ to graze.

DEPAUPERISE, de-paw'per-[=i]z, _v.t._ to remove from the state of
paupers.--_v.t._ DEPAU'PERATE, to impoverish.

DEPEINCT, de-p[=a]nt', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to paint.

DEPEND, de-pend', _v.i._ to hang down: to be sustained by or connected with
anything: to be pending: to rely: to rest.--_adjs._ DEPEND'ABLE, that may
be depended on; DEPEND'ENT, depending, relying on, contingent,
relative.--_n._ a subordinate: a hanger-on--also DEPEND'ANT.--_ns._
DEPEND'ENCE, state of being dependent, reliance, trust: that on which one
depends--also DEPEND'ANCE; DEPEND'ENCY, same as DEPENDENCE, in the
additional sense of a foreign territory dependent on the mother-country, a
kind of subordinate colony without self-government.--_adj._ DEPEND'ING,
still undetermined.--_adv._ DEPEND'INGLY. [Fr. _dépendre_--L.
_depend[=e]re_--_de_, from, and _pend[=e]re_, to hang.]

DEPERSONALISE, d[=e]-per'son-al-[=i]z, _v.t._ to take away the
characteristics that constitute the personality of.

DEPHLEGMATE, de-fleg'm[=a]t, _v.t._ (_chem._) to free from water.--_ns._
DEPHLEGM[=A]'TION; DEPHLEGM[=A]'TOR.

DEPHLOGISTICATE, de-flo-jis'ti-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of phlogiston,
once supposed to be the principle of heat.--DEPHLOGISTICATED AIR, the name
given by Priestley to oxygen when discovered by him in 1774.

DEPICT, de-pikt', _v.t._ to paint carefully: to make a likeness of: to
describe minutely. [L. _deping[)e]re_, _depictum_--_de_, inten.,
_ping[)e]re_, to paint.]

DEPICTURE, de-pikt'[=u]r, _v.t._ to picture: to paint: to
represent:--_pr.p._ depict'[=u]ring; _pa.p._ depict'[=u]red.

DEPILATE, dep'i-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to remove the hair from.--_ns._
DEPIL[=A]'TION; DEPIL'ATORY, an application for removing superfluous
hairs.--_adj._ possessing this quality.

DEPLANTATION, d[=e]-plan-t[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of clearing from plants
or of transplanting.

DEPLETE, de-pl[=e]t', _v.t._ to empty, reduce, exhaust.--_n._
DEPL[=E]'TION, the act of emptying or exhausting: (_med._) the act of
relieving congestion or plethora, by purging, blood-letting, or reduction
of the system by abstinence.--_adjs._ DEPL[=E]'TIVE, DEPL[=E]'TORY. [L.
_depl[=e]re_, _depl[=e]tum_, to empty, _de_, neg., _pl[=e]re_, to fill.]

DEPLICATION, dep-li-k[=a]'shun, _n._ an unfolding or unplaiting.

DEPLORE, de-pl[=o]r', _v.t._ to feel or express deep grief for.--_adj._
DEPLOR'ABLE, lamentable: sad.--_n._ DEPLOR'ABLENESS.--_adv._
DEPLOR'ABLY.--_n._ DEPLOR[=A]'TION (_obs._), lamentation.--_adv._
DEPLOR'INGLY. [Fr.,--L. _deplor[=a]re_--_de_, inten., _plor[=a]re_, to
weep.]

DEPLOY, de-ploy', _v.t._ to unfold: to open out or extend.--_v.i._ to open:
to extend from column into line, as a body of troops.--_ns._ DEPLOY',
DEPLOY'MENT. [Fr. _déployer_--L. _dis_, apart, and _plic[=a]re_, to fold.
Doublet of DISPLAY.]

DEPLUME, de-pl[=oo]m', _v.t._ to take the plumes or feathers from.--_n._
DEPLUM[=A]'TION.

DEPOLARISE, de-p[=o]'lar-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of polarity.--_n._
DEPOLARIS[=A]'TION.

DEPONE, de-p[=o]n', _v.t._ to testify upon oath. [L. _depon[)e]re_--_de_,
down, and _pon[)e]re_, to place.]

DEPONENT, de-p[=o]'nent, _adj._ (_gram._) applied to verbs with a passive
form but an active signification.--_n._ one who makes a deposition, esp.
under oath, or whose written testimony is used as evidence in a court of
justice. [L., pr.p. of _depon[)e]re_.]

DEPOPULATE, de-pop'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of population, to
dispeople.--_v.i._ to become dispeopled.--_adj._ depopulated.--_ns._
DEPOPUL[=A]'TION, act of depopulating: havoc: destruction; DEPOP'ULATOR.
[L. _depopul[=a]ri_, _depopul[=a]tus_--_de_, inten., and _popul[=a]ri_, to
spread over a country, said of a hostile people (L. _populus_)--hence to
ravage, to destroy. Some make it a freq. of _spoli[=a]re_, to plunder.]

DEPORT, de-p[=o]rt', _v.t._ to transport, to exile: to behave.--_ns._
DEPORT[=A]'TION, transportation, exile; DEPORT'MENT, carriage, behaviour.
[Fr.,--L. _deport[=a]re_--_de_, away, and _port[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to
carry.]

DEPOSE, de-p[=o]z', _v.t._ to remove from a high station: to degrade: to
strip: to attest: (_Shak._) to examine on oath.--_adj._ DEPOS'ABLE.--_n._
DEPOS'AL. [Fr.,--L. _de_, from, _paus[=a]re_, to pause, (late) to place.]

DEPOSIT, de-poz'it, _v.t._ to put or set down: to place: to lay up or past:
to entrust.--_n._ that which is deposited or put down: (_geol._) rocks
produced by precipitation from a fluid medium, by settling from a solution
in water: something entrusted to another's care, esp. money put in a bank:
a pledge: a bailment where one entrusts goods to another to be kept without
recompense--in Scots law, DEPOSIT[=A]'TION.--_ns._ DEPOS'ITARY, a person
with whom anything is left for safe keeping: a guardian--sometimes
DEPOS'ITORY.--_adj._ DEPOS'ITIVE.--_ns._ DEPOS'ITOR; DEPOS'ITORY, a place
where anything is deposited--sometimes DEPOS'ITARY. [Fr.,--L. _depositum_,
placed--_depon[)e]re_, from _de_, and _pon[)e]re_, to put down.]

DEPOSITION, dep-o-zish'un, _n._ act of deposing: act of deponing:
declaration, testimony taken authoritatively, to be used as a substitute
for the production of the witness in open court: removal: act of
depositing: what is deposited, sediment.

DEPOT, dep'[=o], de'p[=o], or d[=e]'p[=o], _n._ a place of deposit: a
storehouse: a military station where stores are kept and recruits trained:
the headquarters of a regiment: the portion of a regiment that remains at
home when the rest go on foreign service: (_U.S._) a railway station. [Fr.
_depôt_--L. _depon[)e]re_, _-positum_.]

DEPRAVE, de-pr[=a]v', _v.t._ to make bad or worse: to corrupt.--_n._
DEPRAV[=A]'TION, act of depraving: state of being depraved:
depravity.--_adj._ DEPR[=A]VED', corrupt.--_adv._ DEPR[=A]V'EDLY.--_ns._
DEPR[=A]V'EDNESS; DEPRAVE'MENT, vitiation.--_adv._ DEPR[=A]V'INGLY.--_n._
DEPRAV'ITY, a vitiated or corrupt state of moral character: extreme
wickedness: corruption: (_theol._) the hereditary tendency of man toward
sin: original sin. [Fr.,--L. _deprav[=a]re_--_de_, inten., _pravus_, bad.]

DEPRECATE, dep're-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to try to ward off by prayer: to desire
earnestly the prevention or removal of: to regret deeply: to argue
against.--_adj._ DEP'RECABLE, that is to be deprecated.--_n._
DEPREC[=A]'TION, act of deprecating, earnest prayer, esp. a special
petition against some evil, in litanies.--_adv._ DEP'RECATINGLY.--_adjs._
DEP'RECATIVE, DEP'RECATORY, tending to avert evil by prayer: having the
form of prayer.--_n._ DEP'RECATOR. [L. _deprec[=a]ri_,
_deprec[=a]tus_--_de_, away, and _prec[=a]ri_, to pray.]

DEPRECIATE, de-pr[=e]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to lower the worth of: to
undervalue: to disparage.--_v.i._ to fall in value.--_n._ DEPRECI[=A]'TION,
the falling of value: disparagement.--_adjs._ DEPR[=E]'CIATIVE,
DEPR[=E]'CIATORY, tending to depreciate or lower.--_n._ DEPR[=E]'CIATOR.
[L. _depreti[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, down, and _pretium_, price.]

DEPREDATE, dep're-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to plunder or prey upon: to rob: to lay
waste: to devour.--_ns._ DEPRED[=A]'TION, act of plundering: state of being
depredated; DEP'REDATOR.--_adj._ DEP'REDATORY. [L. _depræd[=a]ri_,
_-[=a]tus_--_de_, inten., and _præd[=a]ri_--_præda_, plunder.]

DEPREHEND, dep're-hend, _v.t._ to catch, seize: to apprehend. [Through Fr.
from L. _deprehend[)e]re_--_de_, and _prehend[)e]re_, to take.]

DEPRESS, de-pres', _v.t._ to press down: to let down: to lower: to humble:
to make subject: to dispirit or cast a gloom over.--_n._ DEPRES'SANT
(_med._), a sedative.--_p.adj._ DEPRESSED', pressed down: lowered: humbled:
dejected: dispirited.--_adj._ DEPRES'SING, able or tending to
depress.--_adv._ DEPRES'SINGLY.--_ns._ DEPRES'SION, a falling in or
sinking: a lowering: a fall of the barometer: a hollow: abasement:
dejection; DEPRES'SOR, an oppressor: a muscle that draws down: a surgical
instrument for squeezing down a soft part. [L. _deprim[)e]re_,
_-pressum_--_de_, down, and _prim[)e]re_, to press.]

DEPRIVE, de-pr[=i]v', _v.t._ to take away from one his own: in take from:
to dispossess: to degrade (a clergyman) from office: to bereave.--_n._
DEPRIV[=A]'TION, act of depriving: state of being deprived: degradation
from office: loss: bereavement: suffering from hardship.--_adj._
DEPRIV'ATIVE.--_n._ DEPRIVE'MENT. [Low L. _depriv[=a]re_, to degrade--L.
_de_, from, and _priv[=a]re_, to deprive--_privus_, one's own.]

DE PROFUNDIS, d[=e] pr[=o]-fun'dis, 'Out of the depths,' the first words of
the 130th Psalm--also used as a name for this penitential psalm. [L.]

DEPTH, depth, _n._ deepness: the measure of deepness down or inwards: a
deep place: the sea: the middle, as depth of winter: abstruseness: extent
of sagacity and penetration.--_adj._ DEPTH'LESS, having no depth.--OUT OF
ONE'S DEPTH, in water where one cannot touch bottom: in water too deep for
one's safety: beyond one's faculties.--THE DEPTHS, the lowest pitch of
humiliation and misery. [Not in A.S.; Skeat makes it Ice. _dýpð_, from
_djúpr_, deep.]

DEPURATE, dep'[=u]-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to purify: sometimes to render
impure.--_ns._ DEPUR[=A]'TION; DEP'URATOR.--_adj._ DEP'URATORY. [Low L.
_depur[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to purify--L. _de_, and _pur[=a]re_, to
purify--_purus_, pure.]

DEPUTE, de-p[=u]t', _v.t._ to appoint or send, as a substitute or agent: to
send with a special commission: to make over one's powers to
another.--_adj._ in Scotland, appointed deputy (as in
_sheriff-depute_--often called simply the _depute_).--_n._ DEPUT[=A]'TION,
act of deputing: the person or persons deputed or appointed to transact
business for another: persons sent to state a case before a government
official.--_v.t._ DEP'UTISE, to appoint as deputy.--_v.i._ to act as
such.--_n._ DEP'UTY, one deputed or appointed to act for another: a
delegate or representative, or substitute. [Fr.,--L. _deput[=a]re_, to cut
off, (late) to select.]

DERACINATE, de-ras'i-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to pluck up by the roots. [Fr.
_déraciner_--L. _de_, and _radix_, _rad[)i]cis_, a root.]

DERAIL, de-r[=a]l', _v.t._ to cause to leave the rails.--_n._ DERAIL'MENT.

DERAIN, de-r[=a]n', _v.t._ to prove: to justify: to win by fighting: to
prepare for battle: to arrange in order of battle.--Also DERAIGN',
DARRAIN', DARRAYNE'. [O. Fr. _derainier_, _desraisnier_--Late L.
_deration[=a]re_, to vindicate--L. _de_ or _dis_, and _ration[=a]re_, to
discourse; _ratio_, reason.]

DERANGE, de-r[=a]nj', _v.t._ to put out of place or order: to
disorder.--_p.adj._ DERANGED', disordered: insane.--_n._ DERANGE'MENT,
disorder; insanity. [Fr. _déranger_--_dé_ (L. _dis_), asunder, and
_ranger_, to rank.]

DERAY, de-r[=a]', _v.t._ to derange.--_v.i._ to go wild.--_n._ tumult,
disorder. [O. Fr. _desreer_--_des_, neg., and _rei_, _roi_, order. See
ARRAY.]

DERBEND, der'bend, _n._ a wayside Turkish guardhouse.

DERBY, där'bi, _n._ a great horse-race held annually on the Derby Day, on
the Wednesday before Whitsuntide, on Epsom Downs, near London, so called
from the Derby stakes, instituted by the Earl of _Derby_ in 1780; a rounded
felt hat with narrow brim.--_ns._ DER'BYSHIRE-NECK, a form of the disease
_goitre_, occurring in Derbyshire; DER'BYSHIRE-SPAR, a fluorspar found in
Derbyshire.

DER-DOING, der-d[=oo]'ing, _adj._ (_Spens._) doing daring deeds. [See
DERRING-DOE.]

DERELICT, der'e-likt, _adj._ forsaken: abandoned.--_n._ anything forsaken
or abandoned.--_n._ DERELIC'TION, act of forsaking, unfaithfulness or
remissness: state of being abandoned: land gained from the water by a
change of water-line. [L. _derelinqu[)e]re_, _-lictum_,--_de_, inten., and
_linqu[)e]re_, to leave.]

DERELIGIONISE, d[=e]-r[=e]-lij'on-[=i]z, _v.t._ to make irreligious.

DERIDE, de-r[=i]d', _v.t._ to laugh at: to mock.--_n._ DERID'ER.--_adj._
DERID'INGLY. [L. _derid[=e]re_--_de_, inten., and _rid[=e]re_, to laugh.]

DERISION, de-rizh'un, _n._ act of deriding: mockery: a
laughing-stock.--_adjs._ DER[=I]'SIVE, DER[=I]S'ORY, mocking.--_adv._
DER[=I]'SIVELY.--_n._ DER[=I]'SIVENESS.

DERIVE, de-r[=i]v', _v.t._ to draw from, as water from a river; to take or
receive from a source or origin: to infer: (_ety._) to trace a word to its
root.--_adj._ DER[=I]V'ABLE.--_adv._ DER[=I]V'ABLY.--_adj._ DER'IVATE,
derived.--_n._ a derivative.--_n._ DERIV[=A]'TION, act of deriving: a
drawing off or from: the tracing of a word to its original root: that which
is derived: descent or evolution of man or animals.--_adj._
DERIV[=A]'TIONAL.--_n._ DERIV[=A]'TIONIST.--_adj._ DERIV'ATIVE, derived or
taken from something else: not radical or original.--_n._ that which is
derived: a word formed from another word.--_adv._ DERIV'ATIVELY. [O. Fr.
_deriver_--L. _deriv[=a]re_--_de_, down from, _rivus_, a river.]

DERM, d[.e]rm, _n._ the skin--also DER'MA, DER'MIS.--_adjs._ DER'MAL,
DER'MIC, DERMAT'IC, pertaining to the skin: consisting of skin.--_n._
DERMATOG'RAPHY, anatomical description of the skin--also
DERMOG'RAPHY.--_adjs._ DER'MATOID, of the form of skin: skin-like;
DERMATOLOG'ICAL.--_ns._ DERMATOL'OGIST; DERMATOL'OGY, the branch of
physiology which treats of the skin; DER'MATOPHYTE, a parasitic fungus on
the skin; DER'MATOSKEL'ETON, the bony integument of many reptiles, insects,
and crustaceans--also DERMOSKEL'ETON.--_adj._ DERMOGAS'TRIC, connecting the
skin and the stomach. [Gr. _derma_, _dermatos_, the skin--_derein_, to
flay.]

DERN, d[.e]rn, _adj._ secret: hidden: (_Shak._) dreadful--also
DEARN.--_adjs._ DERN'FUL, DEARN'FUL, solitary: mournful.--_advs._ DERN'LY,
DEARN'LY, secretly: sorrowfully: grievously. [M. E. _dern_, _dærne_--A.S.
_dyrne_, _derne_, secret.]

DEROGATE, der'o-g[=a]t, _v.i._ to lessen by taking away: to
detract.--_adj._ (_Shak._) degenerate.--_adv._ DER'OG[=A]TELY (_Shak._), in
a derogatory manner.--_n._ DEROG[=A]'TION, a taking from: detraction:
depreciation.--_adv._ DEROG'ATORILY.--_n._ DEROG'ATORINESS.--_adj._
DEROG'ATORY, detracting: injurious. [L. _derog[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to
repeal part of a law--_de_, down from, and _rog[=a]re_, to propose a law.]

DERRICK, der'ik, _n._ an apparatus for lifting weights, closely resembling
a crane.--FLOATING DERRICK, a derrick mounted on a special boat: a beam
supported at an angle between the perpendicular and horizontal, with tackle
for raising heavy weights. [From _Derrick_, the name of a hangman in the
early part of the 17th century.]

DERRING-DOE, der'ring-d[=oo], _n._ daring action. [M. E. _dorryng-don_,
_duryng-do_, &c., as in Chaucer; taken over by Spenser in the spellings
_derring-doe_ and _der-doing_, with the noun _derring-doer_. _Daring-do_
should be the modern English form.]

DERRINGER, der'in-jer, _n._ a short-rifled pistol, with one barrel--from
the inventor, an American.

DERTH, d[.e]rth, _n._ (_Spens._). Same as DEARTH.

DERVISH, d[.e]r'vish, _n._ among Mohammedans, a member of one of the
numerous orders of monks who profess poverty and lead an austere life.
[Pers. _darvísh_, a dervish--lit., a poor man.]

DESART, des'art, _n._ an old form of DESERT.

DESCANT, des'kant, _n._ the air in a four-part song: a discourse or
disquisition under several heads.--_v.i._ DESCANT', to discourse at length:
to comment. [O. Fr. _descant_--L. _dis_, apart, and _cantus_, a
song--_cant[=a]re_, to sing.]

DESCEND, d[=e]-send', _v.i._ to climb down: to pass from a higher to a
lower place or condition: to pass from general to particulars: to fall upon
or invade: to be derived.--_v.t._ to go down upon: to go to the bottom
of.--_n._ DESCEND'ANT, one who descends, as offspring from an
ancestor.--_adjs._ DESCEND'ENT, descending or going down: proceeding from
an ancestor; DESCEND'IBLE, that may descend or be descended: capable of
transmission by inheritance, heritable.--_p.adj._ DESCEND'ING.--_n._
DESCEN'SION.--_adj._ DESCEN'SIONAL.--_n._ DESCENT', act of descending:
transmission by succession: motion or progress downward: slope: a falling
upon or invasion: derivation from an ancestor: a generation, a degree in
genealogy: descendants collectively.--DESCENT FROM THE CROSS, a picture
representing Christ being taken down from the cross. [Fr. _descendre_--L.
_descend[)e]re_--_de_, down, _scand[)e]re_, to climb.]

DESCRIBE, d[=e]-skr[=i]b', _v.t._ to trace out or delineate: to give an
account of.--_adj._ DESCRIB'ABLE.--_n._ DESCRIB'ER. [L.
_describ[)e]re_--_de_, down, and _scrib[)e]re_, _scriptum_, to write.]

DESCRIPTION, de-skrip'shun, _n._ act of describing: an account of anything
in words: definition: sort, class, or kind.--_adj._ DESCRIP'TIVE,
containing description.--_adv._ DESCRIP'TIVELY.--_n._ DESCRIP'TIVENESS.

DESCRIVE, de-skr[=i]v', _v.t._ an obsolete form of _describe_.

DESCRY, de-skr[=i]', _v.t._ to discover by the eye: to espy:--_pr.p._
descry'ing; _pa.p._ descried'.--_n._ discovery: (_Shak._) a thing
discovered. [O. Fr. _descrire_ for _descrivre_--L. _describ[)e]re_: a
doublet of _describe_. Others derive the word from O. Fr. _descrier_,
_decryer_, proclaim, announce--_des-_, _de-_, and _crier_, to cry, in which
case it would be a doublet of _decry_.]

DESECRATE, des'e-kr[=a]t, _v.t._ to divert from a sacred purpose: to
profane.--_ns._ DESECRAT'ER, -OR, DESECR[=A]'TION, act of desecrating:
profanation. [L. _desecr[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, away from, and
_sacr[=a]re_, to make sacred--_sacer_, sacred.]

DESERT, de-z[.e]rt', _n._ the reward or punishment deserved: claim to
reward: merit--_adj._ DESERT'LESS, without merit. [See DESERVE.]

DESERT, de-z[.e]rt', _v.t._ to leave: to forsake.--_v.i._ to run away: to
quit a service, as the army, without permission.--_ns._ DESERT'ER, one who
deserts or quits a service without permission; DESER'TION, act of
deserting: state of being deserted: wilful abandonment of a legal or moral
duty or obligation. [L. _deser[)e]re_, _desertum_--_de_, neg., and
_ser[)e]re_, to bind.]

DESERT, dez'[.e]rt, _adj._ deserted: desolate: uninhabited: uncultivated: a
desolate or barren place: a wilderness: a solitude. [O. Fr. _desert_--L.
_desertum_, _deser[)e]re_, to desert, unbind.]

DESERVE, de-z[.e]rv', _v.t._ to earn by service: to merit.--_v.i._ to be
worthy of reward.--_adj._ DESERV'ING, worthy.--_n._ desert.--_advs._
DESERV'INGLY, DESERV'EDLY, according to desert: justly. [Fr.,--L.
_deserv[=i]re_--_de_, inten., _serv[=i]re_, to serve.]

DESHABILLE, des-a-bil', _n._ an undress: a careless toilet. [Fr.
_déshabillé_, undressed--_des_ = L. _dis_ = _un_, not, and _habiller_, to
dress.]

DESICCATE, de-sik'[=a]t, or des'i-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to dry up.--_v.i._ to grow
dry.--_adjs._ DESIC'CANT, DESIC'CATIVE, drying: having the power of
drying.--_n._ an application that tends to dry up sores.--_n._
DESICC[=A]'TION, the act of desiccating: state of being desiccated. [L.
_desicc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to dry up--_de_, and _siccus_, dry.]

DESIDERATE, de-sid'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to long for or earnestly desire a
thing: to want or miss.--_n._ DESIDER[=A]'TION, the act of desiderating:
the thing desiderated.--_adj._ DESID'ERATIVE, implying desire, as in
desiderative verb.--_n._ DESIDER[=A]'TUM, something desired or much
wanted:--_pl._ DESIDER[=A]'TA. [L. _desider[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to long
for. A doublet of _desire_.]

DESIGHTMENT, d[=e]-s[=i]t'ment, _n._ disfigurement.

DESIGN, de-z[=i]n', or de-s[=i]n', _v.t._ to draw: to form a plan of: to
contrive: to intend.--_n._ a drawing or sketch: a plan in outline: a plan
or scheme formed in the mind: plot: intention.--_adj._ DESIGN'ABLE.--_v.t._
DES'IGN[=A]TE, to mark out so as to make known: to show: to name.--_ns._
DESIGN[=A]'TION, a showing or pointing out: name: title;
DES'IGN[=A]TOR.--_adv._ DESIGN'EDLY, by design: intentionally.--_n._
DESIGN'ER, one who furnishes designs or patterns: a plotter.--_adjs._
DESIGN'FUL, full of design; DESIGN'ING, artful: scheming: deceitful.--_n._
the art of making designs or patterns.--_adj._ DESIGN'LESS.--_n._
DESIGN'MENT, the design or sketch of a work: (_Shak._) intention, purpose,
enterprise.--THE ARGUMENT FROM DESIGN, the argument for the existence of
God derived from the evidences of design in creation. [Fr.,--L.
_design[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, and _signum_, a mark.]

DESILVER, de-sil'v[.e]r, _v.t._ to deprive of silver: to extract the silver
from--also DESIL'VERISE.--_n._ DESILVERIS[=A]'TION.

DESINE, de-s[=i]n', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to denote.

DESIPIENCE, de-sip'i-ens, _n._ (_rare_) silliness, nonsense.--_adj._
DESIP'IENT, foolish. [L. _desipiens_, _desip[)e]re_, to be foolish, _de-_,
neg., _sap[)e]re_, to be wise.]

DESIRE, de-z[=i]r', _v.t._ to long for the possession of: to wish for: to
request, ask: (_B._) to regret.--_v.i._ to be in a state of desire.--_n._
an earnest longing for: eagerness to obtain: a prayer or request: the
object desired: lust.--_adj._ DESIR'ABLE, worthy of desire: pleasing:
agreeable.--_ns._ DESIR'ABLENESS, DESIRABIL'ITY.--_adv._
DESIR'ABLY.--_adj._ DESIRE'LESS.--_n._ DESIR'ER.--_adj._ DESIR'OUS, full of
desire: anxious to obtain: eager.--_adv._ DESIR'OUSLY.--_n._ DESIR'OUSNESS.
[Fr. _désirer_--L. _desider[=a]re_. See DESIDERATE.]

DESIST, de-sist', _v.i._ to stop: to forbear.--_ns._ DESIST'ANCE, -ENCE, a
desisting. [Fr.,--L. _desist[)e]re_--_de_, away, and _sist[)e]re_, to cause
to stand.]

DESK, desk, _n._ a sloping table for the use of writers or readers, often
fitted with drawers, &c.: a shut-up writing-box: a pulpit or lectern.--_n._
DESK'-WORK, work done at a desk, professional labours of a clerk or author.
[M. E. _deske_--L. _discus_. It is a variant of _dish_ and _disc_.]

DESMAN, des'man, _n._ a kind of musk-rat, found in Russia and the Pyrenees.
[Sw. _desman_, musk; Ice. _des_, musk.]

DESMID, des'mid, _n._ one of a group of microscopic algæ. [Formed as a dim.
of Gr. _desmos_, a chain.]

DESMINE, des'min, _n._ a zeolitic mineral occurring in clusters. [Gr.
_desmos_, a band.]

DESMODIUM, des-m[=o]'di-um, _n._ a genus of leguminous plants to which the
_D. gyrans_, or telegraph plant, belongs. [Gr. _desmos_, chain, _eidos_,
form.]

DESMOID, des'moid, _adj._ arranged in bundles. [Gr. _desmos_, a chain, a
bundle, and _eidos_, form.]

DESMOLOGY, des-mol'o-ji, _n._ the anatomy of the ligaments.--_ns._
DESMOG'RAPHY, the description of these; DESMOT'OMY, their dissection. [Gr.
_desmos_, a ligament, and _logia_, a discourse.]

DESOLATE, des'o-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to make solitary: to deprive of inhabitants:
to lay waste.--_adj._ solitary: destitute of inhabitants: laid
waste.--_adv._ DES'OLATELY.--_ns._ DES'OLATENESS; DESOLAT'ER, -OR;
DESOL[=A]'TION, waste: destruction: a place desolated.--_adj._ DES'OLATORY.
[L. _desol[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, inten., and _sol[=a]re_, to make
alone--_solus_, alone.]

DESPAIR, de-sp[=a]r', _v.i._ to be without hope: to despond.--_n._ want of
hope: utter hopelessness: that which causes despair.--_adj._ DESPAIR'FUL
(_Spens._).--_p.adj._ DESPAIR'ING, apt to despair: full of despair.--_adv._
DESPAIR'INGLY. [O. Fr. _desperer_--L. _desper[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_,
neg., and _sper[=a]re_, to hope.]

DESPATCH, de-spach', DISPATCH, dis-pach', _v.t._ to send away hastily: to
send out of the world: to put to death: to dispose of: to perform
speedily.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to make haste.--_n._ a sending away in haste:
dismissal: rapid performance: haste: the sending off of the mails: that
which is despatched, as a message, esp. telegraphic.--_ns._ DESPATCH'-BOAT,
a government vessel for carrying despatches; DESPATCH'-BOX, a box for
containing official despatches; DESPATCH'ER.--_adv._ DESPATCH'FUL
(_Milt._), swift.--HAPPY DESPATCH, a playful name given to the Japanese
_hara-kiri_ or judicial suicide; PNEUMATIC DESPATCH (see PNEUMATIC). [O.
Fr. _despeecher_ (mod. Fr. _dépêcher_); acc. to Littré, from an assumed Low
L. _despedic[=a]re_, to remove obstacles (_pedica_, a fetter), the opp. of
_impedic[=a]re_. See IMPEACH.]

DESPERADO, des-p[.e]r-[=a]'d[=o], _n._ a desperate fellow: one reckless of
danger: a madman:--_pl._ DESPER[=A]'DOS. [Sp. _desesperado_--L.
_desper[=a]tus_.]

DESPERATE, des'p[.e]r-[=a]t, _adj._ in a state of despair: hopeless: beyond
hope: fearless of danger: rash: furious.--_adv._ DES'PERATELY.--_ns._
DES'PERATENESS, DESPER[=A]'TION, state of despair: disregard of danger:
fury. [See DESPAIR.]

DESPICABLE, des'pi-ka-bl, _adj._ deserving to be despised: contemptible:
worthless.--_ns._ DES'PICABLENESS, DESPICABIL'ITY.--_adv._ DES'PICABLY. [L.
_despic[)e]re_, to despise.]

DESPIGHT, de-sp[=i]t', an old form of _despite_.

DESPISE, de-sp[=i]z', _v.t._ to look down upon with contempt: to
scorn.--_adj._ DESPIS'ABLE.--_ns._ DESP[=I]'SAL, contempt; DESPIS'EDNESS
(_Milt._); DESPIS'ER. [O. Fr. _despiz_, _despire_--L. _despic[)e]re_--_de_,
down, _spec[)e]re_, to look.]

DESPITE, de-sp[=i]t', _n._ a looking down upon with contempt: violent
malice or hatred.--_prep._ in spite of: notwithstanding.--_adj._
DESPITE'FUL.--_adv._ DESPITE'FULLY.--_n._ DESPITE'FULNESS.--_adj._
DESPIT'EOUS (_Spens._). [O. Fr. _despit_ (mod. _dépit_)--L.
_despectus_--_despic[)e]re_.]

DESPOIL, de-spoil', _v.t._ to spoil completely: to strip: to bereave: to
rob.--_ns._ DESPOIL'ER; DESPOLI[=A]'TION, DESPOIL'MENT. [O. Fr.
_despoiller_ (mod. _dépouiller_)--L. _despoli[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and
_spolium_, spoil.]

DESPOND, de-spond', _v.i._ to lose hope or courage: to despair.--_ns._
DESPOND'ENCE, DESPOND'ENCY, state of being without hope: dejection.--_adj._
DESPOND'ENT, desponding: without courage or hope: sad.--_advs._
DESPOND'ENTLY; DESPOND'INGLY. [L. _despond[=e]re_, to promise, to give up
or devote to, to give up or resign, to lose courage, to despond--_de_,
away, and _spond[=e]re_, to promise.]

DESPOT, des'pot, _n._ one invested with absolute power: a tyrant.--_n._
DES'POTAT, a territory governed by a despot.--_adjs._ DESPOT'IC, -AL,
pertaining to or like a despot: having absolute power: tyrannical.--_adv._
DESPOT'ICALLY.--_ns._ DESPOT'ICALNESS, DES'POTISM, absolute power: tyranny;
DESPOTOC'RACY, government by a despot. [O. Fr. _despot_--Low L.
_despotus_--Gr. _despot[=e]s_, a master.]

DESPUMATE, de-sp[=u]'m[=a]t, or des'p[=u]-m[=a]t, _v.i._ to throw off in
foam or scum.--_n._ DESPUM[=A]'TION. [L. _despum[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_,
off, and _spuma_, foam.]

DESQUAMATE, des'kwa-m[=a]t, _v.i._ to scale off.--_n._ DESQUAM[=A]'TION, a
scaling off: the separation of the cuticle or skin in scales.--_adjs._
DESQUAM'ATIVE, DESQUAM'ATORY. [L. _desquam[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, off,
and _squama_, a scale.]

DESSE, des, _n._ (_Spens._) a dais.

DESSERT, dez-[.e]rt', _n._ fruits, confections, &c., served at the close of
an entertainment after the rest has been taken away.--_ns._
DESSERT'-SERV'ICE, the dishes used for dessert; DESSERT'-SPOON, a spoon
smaller than a table-spoon and larger than a tea-spoon, used not so much
for dessert as for pudding. [O. Fr. _dessert_, _desservir_, to clear the
table--_des_, away, and _servir_, to serve--L. _serv[=i]re_.]

DESSIATINE, DESSYATINE, des'ya-tin, _n._ a Russian measure of land, 2.7
English acres. [Russ. _desyatina_, a measure of land, a tenth; _desyati_,
ten.]

DESTEMPER. See DISTEMPER (1).

DESTINE, des'tin, _v.t._ to ordain or appoint to a certain use or state: to
fix: to doom--also DES'TINATE (_obs._).--_ns._ DESTIN[=A]'TION, the purpose
or end to which anything is destined or appointed: end: purpose: design:
fate: place to which one is going; DES'TINY, the purpose or end to which
any person or thing is destined or appointed: unavoidable fate: necessity.
[Fr.,--L. _destin[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and root _sta-_, in _st[=a]re_, to
stand.]

DESTITUTE, des'ti-t[=u]t, _adj._ left alone: forsaken: in want,
needy--_v.t._ to forsake: to deprive.--_n._ DESTITU'TION, the state of
being destitute: deprivation of office: poverty. [L. _destitu[)e]re_,
_-[=u]tum_--_de_, away, and _statu[)e]re_, to place.]

DESTROY, de-stroy', _v.i._ to unbuild or pull down: to overturn: to ruin:
to put an end to:--_pr.p._ destroy'ing:--_pa.p._ destroyed'.--_n._
DESTROY'ER. [O. Fr. _destruire_ (Fr. _détruire_)--L. _destru[)e]re_,
_destructum_--_de_, down, and _stru[)e]re_, to build.]

DESTRUCTION, de-struk'shun, _n._ act of destroying: overthrow: physical or
moral ruin: death: a destructive plague.--_adj._ DESTRUC'TIBLE, liable to
be destroyed.--_ns._ DESTRUCTIBIL'ITY, DESTRUC'TIBLENESS.--_n._
DESTRUC'TIONIST, one engaged in destruction: one who believes in the final
annihilation of the damned.--_adj._ DESTRUC'TIVE, causing destruction:
mischievous: ruinous: deadly.--_adv._ DESTRUC'TIVELY.--_ns._
DESTRUC'TIVENESS; DESTRUC'TIVIST, a representative of destructive
principles, as in Biblical criticism; DESTRUC'TOR, a destroyer: a furnace
for burning up refuse.

DESUDATION, des-[=u]-d[=a]'shun, _n._ a violent sweating: an eruption of
small pimples on children. [L. _desud[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, _de_, inten., and
_sud[=a]re_, to sweat.]

DESUETUDE, des'we-t[=u]d, _n._ disuse: discontinuance of custom, habit, or
practice. [L. _desuetudo_--_desu[=e]tum_, _desuesc[)e]re_--_de_, neg., and
_suesc[)e]re_, to become used.]

DESULPHUR, de-sul'fur, _v.t._ to free of sulphur: to take sulphur out of
the ore--also DESUL'PHUR[=A]TE, DESUL'PHURISE.--_n._ DESULPHUR[=A]'TION.

DESULTORY, des'ul-tor-i, _adj._ jumping from one thing to another: without
rational or logical connection: rambling: hasty: loose.--_adv._
DES'ULTORILY.--_n._ DES'ULTORINESS. [L. _desultorius_, of or pertaining to
a vaulter, inconstant, _desultor_, a vaulter, _desil[=i]re_, _-sultum_, to
leap--_de_, from, and _sal[=i]re_, to jump.]

DETACH, de-tach', _v.t._ to unfasten: to take from or separate: to
withdraw: to send off on special service.--_v.i._ to separate one's
self.--_adj._ DETACH'ABLE.--_p.adj._ DETACHED', unconnected: separate: free
from care, passion, ambition, and worldly bonds.--_adv._
DETACH'EDLY.--_ns._ DETACH'EDNESS; DETACH'MENT, state of being separated:
that which is detached, as a body of troops. [Fr. _détacher_--_de_, neg.,
and root of _attach_.]

DETAIL, de-t[=a]l', _v.t._ to relate minutely: to enumerate: to set apart
for a particular service.--_v.i._ to give details about anything.--_n._
(de-t[=a]l', or d[=e]'t[=a]l) a small part: an item: a particular
account.--_adj._ DETAILED', giving full particulars: exhaustive.--IN
DETAIL, circumstantially, point by point. [O. Fr. _detailler_--_de_,
inten., and _tailler_, to cut. See TAILOR.]

DETAIN, de-t[=a]n', _v.t._ to hold from or back: to stop: to keep: to keep
in custody.--_ns._ DETAIN'ER, one who detains: (_law_) the holding of what
belongs to another: a warrant to a sheriff to keep in custody a person
already in confinement: DETAIN'MENT (same as DETENTION). [O. Fr.
_detenir_--L. _detin[=e]re_--_de_, from, and _ten[=e]re_, to hold.]

DETECT, de-tekt', _v.t._ (_lit._) to uncover--hence to discover: to find
out.--_adjs._ DETECT'ABLE, DETECT'IBLE.--_ns._ DETECT'ER, -OR, one who
detects: an apparatus for detecting something, as a detector-lock, which
shows if it has been tampered with; DETEC'TION, discovery of something
hidden: state of being found out.--_adj._ DETECT'IVE, employed in
detecting.--_n._ a policeman employed in the investigation of special cases
of crime, or in watching special classes of wrong-doers, usually not in
uniform.--PRIVATE DETECTIVE, one employed by a private person to gain
information, or to watch his interests. [L. _detectum_,
_deteg[)e]re_--_de_, neg., and _teg[)e]re_, _tectum_, to cover.]

DETENTION, de-ten'shun, _n._ act of detaining: state of being detained:
confinement: delay.--_n._ DETENT', something to check motion: a catch, esp.
in a clock or watch. [See DETAIN.]

DETER, de-t[.e]r', _v.t._ to frighten from: to hinder or prevent:--_pr.p._
deter'ring; _pa.p._ deterred'.--_n._ DETER'MENT. [L. _deterr[=e]re_--_de_,
from, _terr[=e]re_, to frighten.]

DETERGE, de-t[.e]rj', _v.t._ to wipe off; to cleanse (as a wound).--_ns._
DETERG'ENCE, DETERG'ENCY.--_adj._ DETERG'ENT, cleansing: purging.--_n._
that which cleanses. [L. _deterg[=e]re_, _detersum_--_de_, off, and
_tergere_, to wipe.]

DETERIORATE, de-t[=e]'ri-o-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to make worse.--_v.i._ to grow
worse.--_p.adj._ DET[=E]'RIORATED, spoilt: of inferior quality.--_n._
DETERIOR[=A]'TION, the act of making worse: the state of growing
worse.--_adj._ DET[=E]'RIORATIVE.--_n._ DETERIOR'ITY (_obs._), worse state.
[L. _deterior[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to make worse--_deterior_, worse--obs.
_deter_, lower--_de_, down; cf. _inter-ior_.]

DETERMINE, d[=e]-t[.e]r'min, _v.t._ to put terms or bounds to: to limit: to
fix or settle the form or character of: to influence; to put an end to: to
define.--_v.i._ to come to a decision: to resolve.--_adj._ DETER'MINABLE,
capable of being determined, decided, or finished.--_ns._
DETER'MINABLENESS, DETERMINABIL'ITY.--_adj._ DETER'MINANT, serving to
determine.--_n._ that which serves to determine: in mathematical analysis,
a symbolical method used for different processes, as for the solution of
equations by inspection.--_adj._ DETER'MIN[=A]TE, determined or limited:
fixed: decisive.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to determine.--_adv._
DETER'MIN[=A]TELY.--_n._ DETERMIN[=A]'TION, that which is determined or
resolved on: end: direction to a certain end: resolution: fixedness of
purpose: decision of character.--_adjs._ DETER'MIN[=A]TIVE, that
determines, limits, or defines; DETER'MINED, firm in purpose: fixed:
resolute.--_adv._ DETER'MINEDLY.--_n._ DETER'MINISM, the doctrine that all
things, including the will, are determined by causes--the converse of
free-will: necessitarianism.--_n._ DETER'MINIST.--_adj._ DETERMINIS'TIC.
[Fr.,--L. _determin[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, neg., and _terminus_, a
boundary.]

DETERRENT, de-t[.e]r'ent, _adj._ serving to deter.--_n._ anything that
deters or prevents. [See DETER.]

DETERSION, de-t[.e]r'shun, _n._ act of cleansing. [See DETERGE.]

DETERSIVE, de-t[.e]r'siv, _n._ Same as DETERGENT.

DETEST, de-test', _v.t._ to hate intensely.--_adj._ DETEST'ABLE, worthy of
being detested: extremely hateful: abominable.--_n._
DETEST'ABLENESS.--_adv._ DETEST'ABLY.--_n._ DETEST[=A]'TION, extreme
hatred. [Fr.,--L. _detest[=a]ri_--_de_, inten., and _test[=a]ri_, to call
to witness, execrate--_testis_, a witness.]

DETHRONE, de-thr[=o]n', _v.t._ to remove from a throne.--_ns._
DETHRONE'MENT; DETHRONIS[=A]'TION.

DETONATE, det'o-n[=a]t, _v.i._ to explode.--_v.t._ to cause to
explode.--_ns._ DETON[=A]'TION, an explosion with report; DET'ONATOR, a
detonating substance: an apparatus for the explosion of a detonating
substance, as a percussion-cap.--DETONATING POWDER, powder, such as the
fulminates, which explodes easily by impact or heating, and which may be
used to cause other substances to explode. [L. _deton[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, down, and _ton[=a]re_, to thunder.]

DETORT, de-tort', _v.t._ to distort.--_ns._ DETOR'SION, DETOR'TION. [L.
_detorqu[=e]re_, _detortum_; _de_, away, and _torquere_, twist.]

DETOUR, de-t[=oo]r', _n._ a winding: a circuitous way. [Fr. _dé_, for L.
_dis_, asunder, and _tour_, a turning.]

DETRACT, de-trakt', _v.t._ to take away, abate: to defame.--_v.i._ to take
away reputation (with _from_): to reduce in degree: diminish.--_ns._
DETRACT'ER, -OR:--_fem._ DETRACT'RESS.--_adv._ DETRACT'INGLY.--_n._
DETRAC'TION, depreciation: slander.--_adjs._ DETRACT'IVE, DETRAC'TIOUS,
DETRACT'ORY, tending to detract: derogatory. [L. _de_, from, and
_trah[)e]re_, to draw.]

DETRAIN, de-tr[=a]n', _v.t._ to set down out of a railway train, as
troops.--_v.i._ to come out of a train.

DETRIMENT, det'ri-ment, _n._ diminution: damage: loss.--_adj._
DETRIMENT'AL. [L. _detrimentum_--_de_, off, and _ter[)e]re_, _tritum_, to
rub.]

DETRITUS, de-tr[=i]'tus, _n._ a mass of substance gradually rubbed or worn
off solid bodies: an aggregate of broken or loosened fragments, esp. of
rock.--_n._ DETRI'TION, a wearing away. [L.,--_de_, off, and _ter[)e]re_,
_tritum_, to rub.]

DETRUDE, de-tr[=oo]d', _v.t._ to thrust down.--_n._ DETRU'SION. [L. _de_,
down, and _trud[)e]re_, to thrust]

DETRUNCATE, de-trung'k[=a]t, _v.t._ to cut off from the trunk: to lop off:
to shorten.--_n._ DETRUNC[=A]'TION. [L. _detrunc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_,
off, _trunc[=a]re_, lop.]

DETUMESCENCE, d[=e]-t[=u]-mes'ens, _n._ diminution of swelling--opp. to
_Intumescence_.

DEUCE, d[=u]s, _n._ a card or die with two spots: (_lawn tennis_) a term
denoting that each side has gained three points ('forty all').--_n._
DEUCE'-ACE, a throw of two dice, one of which turns up deuce and the other
ace. [Fr. _deux_, two--L. _duos_, accus. of _duo_, two.]

DEUCE, d[=u]s, _n._ the devil--in exclamatory phrases.--_adj._ DEUCED
(d[=u]'sed, or d[=u]st), devilish: excessive.--_adv._ confoundedly.

DEUTEROCANONICAL, d[=u]'t[.e]r-o-ka-non'ik-al, _adj._ pertaining to a
second canon of inferior authority--the O. T. Apocrypha and the N. T.
Antilegomena. [Gr. _deuteros_, second, _kan[=o]n_, rule.]

DEUTEROGAMY, d[=u]-t[.e]r-og'a-mi, _n._ second marriage, esp. of the
clergy, after the death of the first wife.--_n._ DEUTEROG'AMIST, one who
allows such. [Gr. _deuteros_, second, _gamos_, marriage.]

DEUTERONOMY, d[=u]-t[.e]r-on'o-mi, or d[=u]'t[.e]r-on-o-mi, _n._ the fifth
book of the Pentateuch, containing a repetition of the decalogue and laws
given in Exodus.--_adjs._ DEUTERONOM'IC, -AL.--_ns._ DEUTERON'OMIST,
DEU'TERO-IS[=A]'IAH, the assumed author of the later prophecies of Isaiah.
[Gr. _deuteros_, second, _nomos_, law.]

DEUTEROSCOPY, d[=u]-t[.e]r-os'ko-pi, _n._ second-sight. [Gr. _deuteros_,
second, _skopia_--_skopein_, to look.]

DEUTOPLASM, d[=u]'t[=o]-plasm, _n._ secondary, nutritive plasm, or
food-yolk.--_adjs._ DEUTOPLAS'MIC, DEUTOPLAS'TIC.

DEUTOXIDE, d[=u]t-oks'[=i]d, _n._ an old name for a compound of two parts
of oxygen with one of a base. [Gr. _deuteros_, second, and _oxide_.]

DEUTZIA, dewt'si-a, or doit'si-a, _n._ a genus of saxifragaceous plants
with panicles of white flowers, introduced from China and Japan. [Named
after _Deutz_, a Dutch naturalist.]

DEVALL, de-val', _v.i._ (_Scot._) to cease.--_n._ a stop.

DEVANAGARI, d[=a]-va-nä'ga-ri, _n._ the character in which Sanskrit is
usually written and printed. [Sans. 'town-script of the gods,' a term app.
coined by an Indian scholar.]

DEVAPORATION, d[=e]-vap-[=o]-r[=a]'shun, _n._ the change of vapour into
water.

DEVASTATE, dev'as-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to lay waste: to plunder.--_ns._
DEVAST[=A]'TION, act of devastating: state of being devastated: havoc;
DEVAST[=A]'VIT, a waste of the estate of a deceased person by the executor.
[L. _devast[=a]re_, _[=a]tum_--_de_, inten., _vast[=a]re_, to lay waste.]

DEVELOP, d[=e]-vel'op, _v.t._ to unroll: to unfold: to lay open by degrees:
to promote the growth of: (_phot._) to make the latent picture visible by
chemical applications.--_v.i._ to grow into: to open out: to
evolve:--_pr.p._ devel'oping; _pa.p._ devel'oped.--_n._ DEVEL'OPMENT, a
gradual unfolding: a gradual growth: evolution: (_math._) the expression of
a function in the form of a series.--_adj._ DEVELOPMENT'AL, pertaining to
development.--_adv._ DEVELOPMENT'ALLY.--DOCTRINE OF DEVELOPMENT, the theory
of the evolution of new species from lower forms. [Fr. _développer_,
opposite of _envelopper_; both perh. from a Teut. root found in Eng. _lap_,
to wrap.]

DEVEST, de-vest', _v.t._ (_law_) to alienate: to deprive of: to strip. [A
form of _divest_.]

DEVIATE, d[=e]'vi-[=a]t, _v.i._ to go from the way: to turn aside from a
certain course: to err.--_v.t._ to cause to diverge.--_ns._ DEVI[=A]'TION,
a going out of the way: a turning aside; error; D[=E]'VIATOR, one who
deviates.--DEVIATION OF THE COMPASS, departure of the mariner's compass
from the magnetic needle, due to the ship's magnetism--either from the iron
of which it is built or the iron which it carries. [L. _devi[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_de_, from, _via_, a way.]

DEVICE, de-v[=i]s', _n._ that which is devised or designed: contrivance:
power of devising: genius: (_her._) the emblem borne upon a shield: a
picture of some kind, with a motto illustrative of a man's life or
character, borne by an individual rather than by a family.--_adj._
DEVICE'FUL (_Spens._), full of devices. [O. Fr. _devise_. See DEVISE.]

DEVIL, dev'l, _v.t._ (_cook._) to season highly and broil.--_v.i._ to
perform another man's drudgery (esp. to devil for a barrister).

DEVIL, dev'l, _n._ the supreme spirit of evil, Satan: any evil spirit: a
false god: a very wicked person: a fellow, as in 'Poor devil:' an
expletive, in 'What the devil,' &c.--_ns._ DEV'ILDOM; DEV'ILESS; DEV'ILET;
DEV'IL-FISH, a name for the fishing-frog or angler, for the giant-ray of
the United States, and for other large and ugly fishes; DEV'IL-IN-THE-BUSH,
a garden flower, also called _Love-in-a-mist_.--_adj._ DEV'ILISH, fiendish,
malignant.--_adv._ (_coll._) very: exceedingly.--_adv._ DEV'ILISHLY.--_ns._
DEV'ILISM; DEV'ILKIN.--_adj._ DEV'IL-MAY-CARE, reckless, audacious.--_ns._
DEV'ILMENT; DEV'IL-ON-THE-NECK, an old instrument of torture; DEV'ILRY;
DEV'ILSHIP; DEV'ILTRY; DEV'IL-WOR'SHIP, the worship of the devil, or of
devils; DEV'IL-WOR'SHIPPER.--DEVIL A BIT, not at all; DEVIL OF A MESS, a
very bad mess.--DEVIL'S ADVOCATE, a name given to the Promoter of the
Faith, an advocate at the papal court, whose duty it is to propose all
reasonable objections against a person's claims to canonisation; DEVIL'S
BIT, a popular name for scabious; DEVIL'S BOOKS, playing-cards; DEVIL'S
COACH-HORSE, a large dark-coloured beetle; DEVIL'S DOZEN, thirteen (like
baker's dozen); DEVIL'S DUNG, a popular name for asafoetida; DEVIL'S DUST,
shoddy made by a machine called the _devil_; DEVIL'S OWN, a name given to
the 88th Regiment in the Peninsular war, as also to the Inns of Court
volunteers; DEVIL'S SNUFF-BOX, the puff-ball, a kind of fungus; DEVIL'S
TATTOO (see TATTOO); DEVIL TO PAY, serious trouble ahead--said to be from
the difficulty of _paying_, or caulking, an awkward and inaccessible seam
in a ship.--CARTESIAN DEVIL (see CARTESIAN); PRINTER'S DEVIL, the youngest
apprentice in a printing-office: a printer's errand-boy; TASMANIAN DEVIL,
the ursine dasyure, a Tasmanian carnivore.--PLAY THE DEVIL WITH, to bring
to utter ruin. [A.S. _deóful_, _deófol_--L. _diabolus_--Gr. _diabolos_,
from _diaballein_, to throw across, to slander, from _dia_, across, and
_ballein_, to throw; cf. Ger. _teufel_, Fr. _diable_, It. _diavolo_, Sp.
_diablo_.]

DEVIOUS, d[=e]'vi-us, _adj._ from or out of the way: roundabout:
erring.--_adv._ D[=E]'VIOUSLY.--_n._ D[=E]'VIOUSNESS. [L. _devius_. See
DEVIATE.]

DEVISE, de-v[=i]z', _v.t._ to imagine: to scheme: to contrive: to give by
will: to bequeath.--_v.i._ to consider, scheme.--_n._ act of bequeathing: a
will: property bequeathed by will.--_adj._ DEVIS'ABLE.--_ns._ DEVIS'AL;
DEVIS[=E][E]', one to whom real estate is bequeathed; DEVIS'ER, one who
contrives; DEVIS'OR, one who bequeaths. [O. Fr. _deviser_, _devise_--Low L.
_divisa_, a division of goods, a mark, a device--L. _divid[)e]re_,
_divisum_, to divide.]

DEVITALISE, de-v[=i]'ta-l[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of vitality or
life-giving qualities.--_n._ DEVITALIS[=A]'TION.

DEVITRIFY, de-vit'ri-f[=i], _v.t._ to take away or greatly diminish the
vitreous quality of.--_n._ DEVITRIFIC[=A]'TION, loss or diminution of the
vitreous nature.

DEVOCALISE, de-v[=o]'ka-l[=i]z, _v.t._ to make voiceless: to reduce the
vowel element in a sound or syllable.

DEVOID, de-void', _adj._ destitute: free from. [O. Fr. _desvoidier_,
_des_--L. _dis-_, away, _voidier_--L. _vidu[=a]re_, _viduus_, deprived.]

DEVOIR, dev-wawr', _n._ what is due, duty: service: an act of civility.
[Fr.,--L. _deb[=e]re_, to owe.]

DEVOLUTION, dev-ol-[=u]'shun, _n._ a passing from one person to another.
[See DEVOLVE.]

DEVOLVE, de-volv', _v.t._ to roll down: to hand down: to deliver
over.--_v.i._ to roll down: to fall or pass over.--_n._ DEVOLVE'MENT. [L.
_devolv[)e]re_, _-vol[=u]tum_--_de_, down, _volv[)e]re_, _-[=u]tum_, to
roll.]

DEVONIAN, de-v[=o]'ni-an, _adj._ belonging to _Devonshire_: belonging to a
system of geological strata which abound in Devonshire, closely
corresponding to Old Red Sandstone.

DEVONPORT, dev'on-p[=o]rt, _n._ a small ornamental writing-table, fitted
with drawers, &c.

DEVONSHIRE CREAM = CLOTTED CREAM. See CLOT.

DEVOTE, de-v[=o]t', _v.t._ to vow: to set apart or dedicate by solemn act:
to doom: to give up wholly.--_adj._ DEV[=O]T'ED, given up, as by a vow:
doomed: strongly attached: zealous.--_adv._ DEV[=O]T'EDLY.--_ns._
DEV[=O]T'EDNESS; DEVOT[=E][=E]', one wholly or superstitiously devoted,
esp. to religion: a fanatic; DEV[=O]TE'MENT (_Shak._); DEV[=O]'TION,
consecration: giving up of the mind to the worship of God: piety: prayer:
strong affection or attachment: ardour: (_pl._) prayers: (_obs._) religious
offerings: alms.--_adj._ DEV[=O]'TIONAL.--_ns._ DEV[=O]'TIONALIST,
DEV[=O]'TIONIST.--_adv._ DEV[=O]'TIONALLY. [L. _devov[=e]re_,
_dev[=o]tum_--_de_, a way, and _vov[=e]re_, to vow.]

DEVOUR, de-vowr', _v.t._ to swallow greedily: to eat up: to consume or
waste with violence or wantonness: to destroy: to gaze intently on.--_n._
DEVOUR'ER.--_adj._ DEVOUR'ING.--_adv._ DEVOUR'INGLY.--_n._ DEVOUR'MENT. [O.
Fr. _devorer_--L. _devor[=a]re_--_de_, inten., and _vor[=a]re_, to swallow.
See VORACIOUS.]

DEVOUT, de-vowt', _adj._ given up to religious thoughts and exercises:
pious: solemn: earnest.--_adv._ DEVOUT'LY.--_n._ DEVOUT'NESS. [O. Fr.
_devot_--L. _devotus_. See DEVOTE.]

DEW, d[=u], _n._ moisture deposited from the air on cooling, esp. at night,
in minute specks upon the surface of objects: early freshness (esp. in DEW
OF HIS YOUTH).--_v.t._ to wet with dew: to moisten.--_ns._ DEW'BERR'Y, a
kind of bramble or blackberry having a bluish dew-like bloom on the fruit;
DEW'-CLAW, a rudimentary inner toe of a dog's hind-foot; DEW'DROP;
DEW'FALL, the falling of dew, the time it falls; DEW'POINT, the temperature
at which dew begins to form; DEW'-RETT'ING, the process of rotting away the
gummy part of hemp or flax by exposure on the grass to dew and rain;
DEW'STONE, a Nottinghamshire limestone; DEW'-WORM, the common
earthworm.--_adj._ DEW'Y.--MOUNTAIN DEW (_slang_), whisky, originally
illicitly distilled or smuggled spirits. [A.S. _deáw_; cf. Ice. _dögg_,
Ger. _thau_, dew.]

DEW, d[=u], _n._ an obsolete spelling of _due_.

DEWAN, d[=e]-wan', _n._ in India, a financial minister, the native steward
of a business-house.--_ns._ DEWAN'I, DEWAN'NY, the office of dewan. [Hind.]

DEWITT, d[=e]-wit', _v.t._ to lynch--from the fate of Jan and Cornelius _De
Witt_ in Holland in 1672.

DEWLAP, d[=u]'lap, _n._ the pendulous skin under the throat of oxen, dogs,
&c.: the fleshy wattle of the turkey.--_adjs._ DEW'LAPPED, DEW'LAPT. [Prob.
_dew_ and A.S. _læppa_, a loose hanging piece.]

DEXTER, deks't[.e]r, _adj._ on the right-hand side: right: (_her._) of that
side of the shield on the right-hand side of the wearer, to the spectator's
_left_.--_n._ DEXTER'ITY, right-handedness: cleverness: readiness and
skill: adroitness.--_adjs._ DEX'TEROUS, DEX'TROUS, right-handed: adroit:
subtle.--_adv._ DEX'TEROUSLY.--_n._ DEX'TEROUSNESS.--_adj._ DEX'TRAL,
right, as opposed to left.--_n._ DEXTRAL'ITY, right-handedness.--_adv._
DEX'TRALLY.--_adjs._ DEX'TRO-G[=Y]'RATE, causing to turn to the right hand;
DEX'TRORSE, DEXTROR'SAL, rising from right to left. [L. _dexter_; Gr.
_dexios_, Sans. _dakshina_, on the right, on the south.]

DEXTRINE, deks'trin, _n._ starch altered by the action of acids, diastase,
or heat till it loses its gelatinous character, so called because when
viewed through polarised light it turns the plane of polarisation to the
right.--_n._ DEX'TROSE, a glucose sugar, found in grapes, &c., and
manufactured from starch by means of sulphuric acid. [Fr.,--L. _dexter_.]

DEY, d[=a], _n._ a dairy-maid. [See DAIRY.]

DEY, d[=a], _n._ a name given to the pasha or governor of Algiers before
the French conquest. [Turk, _dái_, orig. a maternal uncle, a familiar title
of the chief of the Janizaries.]

DHARMA, där'ma, _n._ the righteousness that underlies the law: the law.
[Sans.]

DHOBIE, d[=o]'bi, _n._ an Indian washerman. [Hind.]

DHOLE, d[=o]l, _n._ the Indian wild dog. [Ind. word.]

DHOOLY, d[=oo]'li, _n._ a covered litter.--Also DOO'LIE. [Hind. _doli_.]

[Illustration]

DHOW, dow, _n._ a native vessel on the eastern African and western Indian
coasts, with lateen sails: an Arab slaver.

DHURRA. Same as DURRA.

DIABASE, d[=i]'a-b[=a]s, _n._ a compact igneous rock, an altered form of
basalt--included under the popular names _greenstone_ and _trap_.--_adj._
DIAB[=A]'SIC.

DIABATERIAL, d[=i]-a-ba-t[=e]'ri-al, _adj._ crossing the boundaries. [Gr.
_diabatos_--_dia_, across, _bainein_, to go.]

DIABETES, d[=i]-a-b[=e]'t[=e]z, _n._ a disease marked by a morbid and
excessive discharge of urine.--_adjs._ DIABET'IC, -AL. [Gr., from
_diabainein_, _dia_, through, and _bainein_, to go.]

DIABLERIE, DIABLERY, di-ab-le-r[=e]', _n._ magic: the black art: sorcery.
[Fr.,--_diable_. See DEVIL.]

DIABOLIC, -AL, d[=i]-a-bol'ik, -al, _adj._ devilish.--_adv._
DIABOL'ICALLY.--_v.t._ DIAB'OLISE, to render devilish.--_ns._ DIAB'OLISM,
devilish conduct: sorcery or black magic; DIABOL'OGY, the doctrine of
devils. [L.,--Gr. _diabolikos_, _diabolos_, the devil. See DEVIL.]

DIACATHOLICON, d[=i]-a-ka-thol'i-kon, _n._ a purgative electuary.

DIACAUSTIC, d[=i]-a-kaws'tik, _adj._ pertaining to curves formed by the
intersections of rays of refracted light.--_n._ a curve so formed. [Formed
from Gr. _dia_, through, and _caustic_.]

DIACHASTIC, d[=i]-a-kas'tik, _adj._ cleaving apart. [Gr.]

DIACHYLON, d[=i]-ak'i-lon, DIACHYLUM, d[=i]-ak'i-lum, _n._ common
sticking-plaster. [Gr. _diachylos_--_dia_, and _chylos_, juice.]

DIACHYMA, d[=i]-ak'i-ma, _n._ the parenchyma of leaves. [Gr. _dia_,
through, _chyma_, juice.]

DIACODIUM, d[=i]-a-k[=o]'di-um, _n._ a syrup of poppies. [L.,--Gr. _dia_,
through, _k[=o]deia_, a poppy-head.]

DIACONATE, d[=i]-ak'o-n[=a]t, _n._ the office of a deacon.--_adj._
DIAC'ONAL, pertaining to a deacon.

DIACONICON, d[=i]-a-kon'i-kon, _n._ a sacristy for sacred vessels, in a
Greek church, on the south side of the bema or sanctuary.

DIACOUSTIC, d[=i]-a-kows'tik, _adj._ pertaining to the refraction of sound
through various mediums.--_n._ DIACOUS'TICS, the branch of physics which
deals with refracted sounds. [Formed from Gr. _dia_, through, and
_acoustics_.]

DIACRITIC, -AL, d[=i]-a-krit'ik, -al, _adj._ distinguishing between--used
of marks or points attached to the letters of various languages. [Gr.
_diakritikos_, _diakrinein_--_dia_, between, and _krinein_, to distinguish.
See CRITIC.]

DIACTINE, d[=i]-ak'tin, _adj._ having two rays.--Also DIAC'TINAL.

DIACTINIC, d[=i]-ak-tin'ik, _adj._ capable of transmitting the actinic rays
of the sun.

DIADELPHOUS, d[=i]-a-del'fus, _adj._ grouped together in two sets--of the
stamens of plants.--_n._ D[=I]'ADELPH. [Formed from Gr. _di-_, double, and
_adelphos_, brother.]

DIADEM, d[=i]'a-dem, _n._ a band or fillet worn round the head as a badge
of royalty: a crown: royalty.--_adj._ D[=I]'ADEMED, wearing a
diadem.--DIADEM SPIDER, the common garden spider--from its markings. [O.
Fr. _diademe_--L. _diadema_--Gr. _diad[=e]ma_--_dia_, round, and _deein_,
to bind.]

DIADEXIS, d[=i]-a-dek'sis, _n._ (_path._) the transformation of one disease
into another, differing both in location and character. [Gr.]

DIADOCHI, d[=i]-ad'o-k[=i], _n._ the generals who became monarchs of the
various kingdoms (Syria, Egypt, &c.) into which the empire of Alexander the
Great split after his death (323 B.C.). [Gr. _diadochos_, succeeding, a
successor; _diadechesthai_, to succeed.]

DIADROM, d[=i]'a-drom, _n._ a course or passing: a vibration. [Gr.]

DIÆRESIS, DIERESIS, d[=i]-[=e]r'e-sis, _n._ a mark (¨) placed over one of
two vowels to show that each is to be pronounced separately, as
_aërial_:--_pl._ DIÆR'ESES, DIER'ESES. [Gr.,--_dia_, apart, _hairein_, to
take.]

DIAGLYPH, d[=i]'a-glif, _n._ an intaglio. [Gr.]

DIAGNOSIS, d[=i]-ag-n[=o]'sis, _n._ the distinguishing a disease by means
of its symptoms: a brief description:--_pl._ DIAGN[=O]'SES.--_v.t._
D[=I]'AGNOSE, to ascertain from symptoms, as a disease.--_adj._
D[=I]AGNOS'TIC, distinguishing: characteristic.--_n._ that by which
anything is known: a symptom.--_n.pl._ DIAGNOS'TICS, the branch of medicine
to which the skill in noting and interpreting symptoms belongs. [Gr.,
_dia_, between, _gn[=o]sis_--_gn[=o]nai_, to know.]

DIAGOMETER, d[=i]-a-gom'e-t[.e]r, _n._ a form of electroscope for
ascertaining conducting power. [Gr. _diagein_, to conduct, _metron_, a
measure.]

DIAGONAL, d[=i]-ag'o-nal, _adj._ through the corners, or from an angle to
an opposite angle of a four or many sided figure.--_n._ a straight line so
drawn.--_adv._ DIAG'ONALLY.--DIAGONAL SCALE, a scale for laying down small
fractions of the unit of measurement, the parallel lines drawn lengthwise
on its surface being divided into sections by lines drawn crosswise, and in
one end section being intersected by a series of other parallel lines drawn
obliquely at equal distances across them. [Fr.,--L. _diagonalis_, from Gr.
_diag[=o]nios_--_dia_, through, and _g[=o]nia_, a corner.]

DIAGRAM, d[=i]'a-gram, _n._ a figure or plan drawn in outline to illustrate
any statement: a record traced by an automatic indicator.--_adj._
DIAGRAMMAT'IC.--_adv._ DIAGRAMMAT'ICALLY.--_n._ D[=I]'AGRAPH, an instrument
for enabling unskilled persons to draw objects in outline.--_adj._
DIAGRAPH'IC. [L.,--Gr. _diagramma_--_dia_, round, _graphein_, to write.]

DIAHELIOTROPIC, d[=i]-a-h[=e]-li-[=o]-trop'ik, _adj._ (_bot._) turning
transversely to the light.--_n._ DIAHELIOT'ROPISM. [Gr. _dia_, across, and
_heliotropic_.]

DIAL, d[=i]'al, _n._ an instrument for showing the time of day by the sun's
shadow: a timepiece: the face of a watch or clock: a circular plate on
which a movable index shows the degree of pressure, &c.--_v.t._ to measure,
as with a dial.--_ns._ D[=I]'ALIST, a maker of dials: one skilled in
dialling; D[=I]'ALLING, the art of constructing dials: the science which
explains the measuring of time by the sun-dial: surveying by help of a
compass with sights, such as is called a 'miner's dial;' D[=I]AL-PLATE. [M.
E. _dial_--Low L. _dialis_, daily--L. _dies_, a day.]

DIALECT, d[=i]'a-lekt, _n._ a variety or form of a language peculiar to a
district: a non-literary vernacular: a peculiar manner of speaking.--_adj._
DIALECT'AL.--_adv._ DIALECT'ALLY.--_ns._ DIALECT'ICISM; DIALECTOL'OGIST;
DIALECTOL'OGY. [Through Fr. and L. from Gr. _dialektos_, speech, manner of
speech, peculiarity of speech--_dia_, between, _legein_, to speak.]

DIALECTIC, -AL, d[=i]-a-lek'tik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to dialect or to
discourse: pertaining to dialectics: logical.--_ns._ DIALEC'TIC,
DIALECT'ICS, art of discussing: that branch of logic which teaches the
rules and modes of reasoning.--_adv._ DIALEC'TICALLY.--_n._ DIALECTI'CIAN,
one skilled in dialectics, a logician. [Gr. _dialektikos_.]

DIALLAGE, d[=i]-al'a-j[=e], _n._ (_rhet._) a figure of speech by which
arguments, after having been considered from various points of view, are
all brought to bear upon one point. [Gr.]

DIALLAGE, d[=i]'al-[=a]j, _n._ a mineral nearly allied to augite, brown,
gray, or green in colour, laminated in structure, with a metallic lustre
when broken across.--_adjs._ DIALLAG'IC, DIAL'LAGOID. [Gr. _diallag[=e]_,
change--_dia_, between, _allassein_, to change--_allos_, other.]

DIALOGITE, d[=i]-al'[=o]-j[=i]t, _n._ a rose-red carbonate of
manganese--also _Rhodochrosite_.

DIALOGUE, d[=i]'a-log, _n._ conversation between two or more persons, esp.
of a formal or imaginary nature.--_v.i._ and _v.t._ (_Shak._) to put into
dialogue form.--_adjs._ DIALOG'IC, DIALOGIST'IC, -AL (-loj-), in the form
of a dialogue.--_v.i._ DIAL'OGISE ('oj-), to discourse in dialogue.--_n._
DIAL'OGIST ('oj-), a speaker in, or writer of, a dialogue. [Fr.,--L.
_dialogus_--Gr. _dialogos_, a conversation--_dialegesthai_, to discourse.]

DIALURIC, d[=i]-a-l[=u]'rik, _adj._ pertaining to alloxan and uric
acid.--_n._ DIAL[=U]'RATE, a salt of dialuric acid.

DIALYSIS, d[=i]-al'i-sis, _n._ (_chem._) the separation of substances by
diffusion through a membranous septum or partition: diæresis:
dissolution:--_pl._ DIAL'YSES.--_adj._ DIALYS'ABLE.--_v.t._ D[=I]'ALYSE, to
separate by dialysis.--_n._ D[=I]'ALYSER.--_adj._ DIALYT'IC. [Gr.
_dialysis_--_dia_, asunder, _lyein_, to loose.]

DIAMAGNETIC, d[=i]-a-mag-net'ik, _adj._ cross-magnetic--applied to any
substance, such as a rod of bismuth or glass, which, when suspended between
the poles of a magnet, arranges itself across the line joining the poles (a
rod of iron or of sealing-wax so held arranges itself parallel to the line
joining the poles, and is said to be _Paramagnetic_).--_adv._
DIAMAGNET'ICALLY.--_n._ DIAMAG'NETISM, the form of magnetic action
possessed by diamagnetic bodies: the branch of magnetism which deals with
diamagnetic phenomena. [Gr. _dia_, through, _magn[=e]t[=e]s_, _magn[=e]s_,
a magnet.]

DIAMANTIFEROUS, d[=i]-a-man-tif'er-us, _adj._ yielding diamonds. [Fr.
_diamantifère_.]

DIAMESOGAMOUS, d[=i]-a-me-sog'a-mus, _adj._ (_bot._) fertilised by
intermediary means.

DIAMETER, d[=i]-am'e-t[.e]r, _n._ the measure through or across: a straight
line passing through the centre of a circle or other figure, terminated at
both ends by the circumference.--_adjs._ DIAM'ETRAL, DIAMET'RIC, -AL, in
the direction of a diameter: pertaining to the diameter: like the opposite
ends of the diameter (as in _diametrical opposition_).--_advs._
DIAM'ETRALLY, in a diametral manner; DIAMET'RICALLY, exactly.--TACTICAL
DIAMETER, the space covered by a steamer in turning 180° out of her
original course. [Through Fr. and L. from Gr. _diametros_--_dia_, through,
_metrein_, to measure.]

DIAMOND, d[=i]'a-mond, _n._ the most valuable of all gems, and the hardest
of all substances: a four-sided figure with two obtuse and two acute
angles: one of the four suits of cards: one of the smallest kinds of
English printing type.--_adj._ resembling diamonds: made of diamonds:
marked with diamonds: lozenge-shaped, rhombic.--_ns._ D[=I]'AMOND-BEE'TLE,
a beautiful sparkling South American weevil; D[=I]'AMOND-CUT'TING,
diamond-setting; D[=I]'AMOND-DRILL, an annular borer whose bit is set with
borts; D[=I]'AMOND-DUST, D[=I]'AMOND-POW'DER, the powder made by the
friction of diamonds on one another in the course of polishing.--_adjs._
D[=I]'AMONDED, furnished with diamonds; DIAMONDIF'EROUS, yielding
diamonds.--_n._ D[=I]'AMOND-WHEEL, a wheel covered with diamond-dust and
oil for polishing diamonds and other precious stones.--DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND,
the case of an encounter between two very sharp persons.--ROUGH DIAMOND, an
uncut diamond: a person of great worth, though of rude exterior and
unpolished manners. [M. E. _adamaunt_--O. Fr. _adamant_--L. _adamanta_,
accus. of _adamas_--Gr. _adamas_, _adamantos_, adamant--_a_, not,
_damaein_, to tame.]

DIANA, di-[=a]'na, or d[=i]-an'a, _n._ an ancient Italian goddess of light,
the moon-goddess, representative of chastity and hunting, afterwards
identified with the Greek Artemis.--DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS, a goddess of
fertility worshipped at _Ephesus_.

DIANDRIA, d[=i]-an'dri-a, _n._ a class of plants in the Linnæan system
having two stamens.--_n._ DIAN'DER, a plant with two stamens.--_adjs._
DIAN'DRIAN, DIAN'DROUS. [Gr. _dis_, twice, double, _an[=e]r_, _andros_, a
man.]

DIANODAL, d[=i]-a-n[=o]'dal, _adj._ (_math._) passing through a node.

DIANOETIC, d[=i]-a-n[=o]-et'ik, _adj._ capable of thought, thinking:
belonging to the ratiocinative faculties of the mind. [Gr.
_diano[=e]tikos_--_dia_, through, _noein_, to think.]

DIANTHUS, d[=i]-an'thus, _n._ the genus of herbaceous flowers to which
carnations and pinks belong. [Gr. _dianth[=e]s_--_dis_, _di-_, two,
_anthos_, a flower.]

DIAPASON, d[=i]-a-p[=a]'zon, _n._ a whole octave: a harmony: a full volume
of various sounds in concord: correct pitch: the two foundation-stops of an
organ (_open_ and _stopped diapason_)--(_Spens._) D[=I]'APASE. [Gr. _dia_,
through, and _pas[=o]n_, gen. pl. of _pas_, all--part of the Gr. phrase,
_dia pas[=o]n chord[=o]n symph[=o]nia_, concord through all the notes.]

DIAPEDESIS, d[=i]-a-pe-d[=e]'sis, _n._ (_physiol._) the migration of white
blood-corpuscles through the walls of the blood-vessels without apparent
rupture.--_adj._ DIAPEDET'IC. [Gr., _dia_, through, _p[=e]dan_, to leap.]

DIAPENTE, d[=i]-a-pen't[=e], _n._ (_mus._) the interval of a fifth: a
composition in pharmacy of five ingredients. [Gr.]

[Illustration]

DIAPER, d[=i]'a-p[.e]r, _n._ unbleached linen cloth woven in slightly
defined figures, used for towels, &c.: a pattern for ornamentation, woven,
not coloured, in textiles: a floral or geometric pattern in low relief in
architecture, often repeated over a considerable surface.--_v.t._ to
variegate with figures, as diaper.--_n._ D[=I]'APERING. [O. Fr. _diaspre_,
_diapre_--Low L. _diasprus_--Byzantine Gr. _diaspros_, _dia_, through,
_aspros_, white.]

DIAPHANOUS, d[=i]-af'a-nus, _adj._ shining or appearing through,
transparent, clear--also DIAPHAN'IC.--_ns._ D[=I]'APHANE, a diaphanous
figured silk fabric; DIAPHANOM'ETER, an instrument for testing the
transparency of the air; DIAPHAN'OSCOPE, a darkened box for viewing
transparent positive photographs; DIAPHAN'OTYPE, a picture produced by
colouring on the back a positive lightly printed on translucent paper, and
placing this exactly over a strong duplicate print.--_adv._
DIAPH'ANOUSLY.--_ns._ DIAPH'ANOUSNESS, DIAPHAN[=E]'ITY. [Gr.
_diaphanes_--_dia_, through, and _phainein_, to show, shine.]

DIAPHONICS, d[=i]-a-fon'iks, _n._ Same as DIACOUSTICS. [Gr. _dia_, through,
_phon[=e]_, sound.]

DIAPHORETIC, d[=i]-a-fo-ret'ik, _adj._ promoting perspiration.--_n._ a
sudorific or medicine that increases perspiration.--_n._ DIAPHOR[=E]'SIS,
perspiration artificially induced. [Gr.,--_diaphorein_, to carry
off--_dia_, through, _pherein_, to bear.]

DIAPHRAGM, d[=i]'a-fram, _n._ a thin partition or dividing membrane: the
midriff, a structure separating the chest from the abdomen: a metal plate
with a central hole, for cutting off side-rays in a camera, &c.--_adjs._
DIAPHRAGMAT'IC, DIAPHRAG'MAL.--_n._ DIAPHRAGMAT[=I]'TIS, inflammation of
the diaphragm. [Gr. _diaphragma_--_dia_, across, _phragnynai_, to fence.]

DIAPHYSIS, d[=i]-af'i-sis, _n._ (_bot._) an abnormal elongation of the axis
of a flower or of an inflorescence: (_anat._) the continuity of a bone
between its two ends. [Gr. _dia_, through, _phyesthai_, to grow.]

DIAPLASIS, d[=i]-ap'la-sis, _n._ (_surg._) reduction, of a dislocation,
&c.--_adj._ DIAPLAS'TIC. [Gr.]

DIAPNOIC, d[=i]-ap-n[=o]'ik, _adj._ producing slight perspiration--also
DIAPNOT'IC--_n._ a mild diaphoretic.

DIAPOSITIVE, d[=i]-a-poz'i-tiv, _n._ a transparent photographic positive,
such as a lantern slide.

DIAPYETIC, d[=i]-a-p[=i]-et'ik, _adj._ producing suppuration.--_n._ a
medicine with this property.--_n._ DIAPY[=E]'SIS, suppuration. [Gr.]

DIARCHY, d[=i]'ar-ki, _n._ a form of government in which two persons are
jointly vested with supreme power--less correctly D[=I]'NARCHY. [Formed
from Gr. _di-_, two, _archein_, to rule.]

DIARRHOEA, DIARRHEA, d[=i]-a-r[=e]'a, _n._ a persistent purging or
looseness of the bowels.--_adjs._ DIARRHOE'AL, DIARRHOE'IC, DIARRHOET'IC
(also -RH[=E]'AL, -RH[=E]'IC, -RHET'IC). [Gr. _diarroia_--_dia_, through,
and _rhein_, to flow.]

DIARTHROSIS, d[=i]-ar-thr[=o]'sis, _n._ the general name for all forms of
articulation which admit of the motion of one bone upon another, free
arthrosis--including _Enarthrosis_, _Ginglymus_, and _Cyclarthrosis_. [Gr.]

DIARY, d[=i]'a-ri, _n._ a daily record: a journal.--_adjs._ DI[=A]'RIAL,
DI[=A]'RIAN.--_v.t._ or _v.i._ D[=I]'ARISE.--_n._ D[=I]'ARIST, one who
keeps a diary. [L. _diarium_.]

DIASCORDIUM, d[=i]-a-skor'di-um, _n._ an electuary prepared with scordium
or water-germander. [Gr. _dia_, through, and _skordion_.]

DIASKEUAST, d[=i]-as-kew'ast, _n._ a reviser: an interpolator.--_n._
DIASKEU'ASIS, reviewing. [Gr. _diaskeuazein_, to make ready--_dia_,
through, _skeuos_, a tool.]

DIASPORA, d[=i]-as'por-a, _n._ dispersion, used collectively for the
dispersed Jews after the Babylonian captivity, and also in the apostolic
age for the Jews living outside of Palestine. [Gr. _dia_, through,
_speirein_, to scatter.]

DIASPORE, d[=i]'a-sp[=o]r, _n._ a grayish, infusible hydrate of aluminium.

DIASTALTIC, d[=i]-a-stal'tik, _adj._ (_Greek mus._) dilated, extended:
bold. [Gr., _diastellein_, to expand.]

DIASTASE, d[=i]'as-t[=a]s, _n._ a peculiar ferment developed during the
germination of all seeds, which has the power of converting starch into
dextrine and then into sugar.--_adj._ DIASTAT'IC--_adv._ DIASTAT'ICALLY.
[Gr. _diastasis_, division--_dia_, through, _histanai_, _st[=e]nai_, to
stand.]

DIASTASIS, d[=i]-as'ta-sis, _n._ (_surg._) separation of bones without
fracture. [Gr.]

DIASTEMA, d[=i]-a-st[=e]'ma, _n._ a natural space between two consecutive
teeth, or series of teeth.--_adj._ DIASTEMAT'IC. [Gr.]

DIASTOLE, d[=i]-as'to-l[=e], _n._ dilation of the heart, auricles, and
arteries--opp. to _Systole_, or contraction of the same: the protracting of
a short syllable, as before a pause.--_adj._ DIASTOL'IC. [Gr.
_diastol[=e]_--_dia_, asunder, and _stellein_, to place.]

DIASTYLE, d[=i]'a-st[=i]l, _adj._ (_archit._) marked by wide
intercolumniation. [Gr.]

DIATESSARON, d[=i]-a-tes'a-r[=o]n, _n._ a harmony of the four gospels, esp.
the earliest, that of Tatian (prob. 110-180 A.D.): (_mus._) the interval of
a fourth: an electuary of four ingredients. [Gr., for _dia tessar[=o]n_,
through, or composed of four.]

DIATHERMAL, d[=i]-a-th[.e]r'mal, _adj._ letting heat through, permeable by
radiating heat--also DIATHER'MANOUS, DIATHER'MOUS, DIATHER'MIC.--_ns._
DIATHER'MANCE, -CY. [Gr. _dia_, through, _thermos_, heat.]

DIATHESIS, d[=i]-ath'e-sis, _n._ a particular condition or habit of body,
esp. one predisposing to certain diseases: a habit of mind.--_adj._
DIATHET'IC. [Gr.,--_dia_, asunder, _tithenai_, to place.]

DIATOM, d[=i]'a-tom, _n._ one of an order of microscopic unicellular algæ,
of the _Diatomaceæ_.--_adj._ DIATOM[=A]'CEOUS.--_n._ DIAT'OMITE,
diatomaceous earth. [Gr. _diatomos_--_dia_, through, _temnein_, to cut.]

DIATOMIC, d[=i]-a-tom'ik, _adj._ consisting of two atoms. [Gr. _di-_,
_dis_, two, and _atom_.]

DIATOMOUS, d[=i]-at'[=o]-mus, _adj._ having crystals with one distinct
diagonal cleavage.

DIATONIC, d[=i]-a-ton'ik, _adj._ proceeding by the tones and intervals of
the natural scale in music.--_adv._ DIATON'ICALLY. [Gr.,--_dia_, through,
_tonos_, tone.]

DIATRIBE, d[=i]'a-tr[=i]b, _n._ a continued discourse or disputation: an
invective harangue.--_n._ D[=I]'ATR[=I]BIST, a writer or utterer of such.
[Gr. _diatrib[=e]_--_dia_, through, _tribein_, to rub, wear away.]

DIB, dib, _v.i._ to dip, as in angling:--_pr.p._ dib'bing; _pa.p._ dibbed.
[A form of _dab_.]

DIB, dib, _n._ one of the small bones of a sheep's leg: (_pl._) a
children's game, played by throwing up such small bones or stones
(DIB'-STONES) from the palm and catching them on the back of the
hand--(_Scot._) _Chuckie-stanes_, or _Chucks_: (_slang_) money.

DIBASIC, d[=i]-b[=a]'sik, _adj._ having two bases: of acids, with two atoms
of hydrogen replaceable by a base or bases. [Gr. _di-_, two, and _basic_.]

DIBBLE, dib'l, _n._ a pointed tool used for making holes to put seed or
plants in--also DIBB'ER.--_v.t._ DIBB'LE, to plant with a dibble.--_v.i._
to make holes: to dip, as in angling.--_n._ DIBB'LER. [Freq. of _dib_, a
form of _dab_.]

DIBRANCHIATA, d[=i]-brang-ki-[=a]'ta, _n._ one of the two orders of
cephalopoda, having two gills.--_adj._ DIBRAN'CHIATE. [Gr._ di-_, two,
_branchia_, gills.]

DICACITY, dik-as'i-ti, _n._ raillery, pert speech.--_adj._ DIC[=A]'CIOUS.
[L. _dicax_, sarcastic.]

DICAST, DIKAST, d[=i]'kast, _n._ one of the 6000 Athenians annually chosen
to act as judges.--_n._ DICAS'TERY, their court. [Gr. _dikast[=e]s_,
_dik[=e]_, justice.]

DICATALECTIC, d[=i]-kat-a-lek'tik, _adj._ doubly catalectic, both at the
middle and end of the verse. [Gr. _di-_, double. See CATALECTIC.]

DICE, _pl._ of DIE, 2 (q.v.).--_v.i._ to play with dice.

DICE-COAL, d[=i]s'-k[=o]l, _n._ a kind of coal which readily splits into
cubical pieces.

DICENTRA, d[=i]-sen'tra, _n._ a genus of plants including the flower
Bleeding-heart (_D. spectabilis_).--Also DIEL'YTRA. [Gr. _di-_, double,
_kentron_, a point.]

DICEPHALOUS, d[=i]-sef'a-lus, _adj._ two-headed. [Gr. _dikephalos_--_di-_,
double, _kephal[=e]_, a head.]

DICHASTASIS, d[=i]-kas'ta-sis, _n._ spontaneous subdivision.--_adj._
DICHAS'TIC. [Gr.]

DICHLAMYDEOUS, d[=i]-kla-mid'[=e]-us, _adj._ having both a calyx and a
corolla.

DICHOGAMY, d[=i]-kog'a-mi, _n._ an arrangement for preventing the
self-fertilisation of hermaphrodite flowers, the stamens and stigmas
ripening at different times.--_adj._ DICHOG'AMOUS. [Gr. _dicha_, in two,
_gamos_, marriage.]

DICHORD, d[=i]'kord, _n._ an ancient two-stringed lute.

DICHOTOMY, d[=i]-kot'o-mi, _n._ a division into two parts.--_v.t._ and
_v.i._ DICHOT'OMISE.--_adj._ DICHOT'OMOUS.--_adv._ DICHOT'OMOUSLY. [Gr.,
from _dicha_, in two, and _temnein_, to cut.]

DICHROISM, d[=i]'kr[=o]-izm, _n._ the property of showing different colours
when viewed in different directions exhibited by doubly refracting
crystals.--_adjs._ DICHR[=O]'IC, DICHROIS'TIC.--_n._ D[=I]'CHROSCOPE, an
instrument for testing the dichroism of crystals.--_adj._ DICHROSCOP'IC.

DICHROMATISM, d[=i]-kr[=o]'ma-tizm, _n._ (_zool._) the quality of
presenting, in different individuals, two different colours or systems of
colouration.--_adj._ DICHROMAT'IC.

DICHROMISM, d[=i]-kr[=o]'mizm, _n._ an inability to distinguish more than
two of the primary colours.--_adj._ DICHR[=O]'MIC.

DICHT, diht, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to wipe.

DICK, dik, _n._ (_slang_) fine words, for _Dictionary_: for _Declaration_,
as 'to take one's dick,' and prob. 'up to dick' = excellent, also properly.

DICKENS, dik'enz, _n._ the deuce, the devil, as in 'What the
dickens.'--PLAY THE DICKENS WITH, to play the deuce with. [For _devil_,
confused with _Dickon_ = Richard.]

DICKER, dik'[.e]r, _n._ (_Amer._) petty trade by barter, &c.--_v.i._ to
haggle. [Prob. the obs. _dicker_, the number ten, esp. of hides or skins.]

DICKEY, DICKY, dik'i, _n._ a leathern apron for a gig, &c.: the driver's
seat in a carriage: a seat for servants at the back of a carriage: a false
shirt-front. [Perh. from _dick_, a prov. Eng. word for a leathern apron;
Prob. Dut. _dek_, a cover.]

DICKY, DICKEY, dik'i, _n._ (_East Anglian_) an ass.--_n._ DICK'Y-BIRD, a
small bird. [From _Dick_, familiar of Richard--like _Jack_, in jackass.]

DICLINIC, d[=i]-klin'ik, _adj._ (_crystal._) having two of the
intersections of the axes oblique.--Also D[=I]'CLINATE, D[=I]'CLINOUS.

DICLINOUS, d[=i]'kli-nus, _adj._ having the stamens and pistils in separate
flowers.--_n._ D[=I]'CLINISM. [Gr. _di-_, asunder, and _klin[=e]_, a bed.]

DICOCCOUS, d[=i]-kok'us, _adj._ (_bot._) formed of two cocci.

DICOELOUS, d[=i]-s[=e]'lus, _adj._ cupped or hollowed at both ends.

DICOTYLEDON, d[=i]-kot-i-l[=e]'don, _n._ a plant having two
seed-lobes.--_adj._ DICOTYL[=E]'DONOUS. [Gr. _di-_, two, and _cotyledon_.]

DICROTIC, d[=i]-krot'ik, _adj._ double-beating--also D[=I]'CROTOUS.--_n._
D[=I]'CROTISM. [Gr., _di-_, two, _krotos_, beat.]

DICTATE, dik't[=a]t, _v.t._ to tell another what to say or write: to
communicate with authority: to point out: to command--(_arch._ DICT).--_n._
an order, rule, or direction: impulse.--_ns._ DICT[=A]'TION, act, art, or
practice of dictating: overbearing command; DICT[=A]'TOR, one invested for
a time with absolute authority--originally an extraordinary Roman
magistrate:--_fem._ DICT[=A]'TRESS, DICT[=A]TRIX.--_adj._ DICTAT[=O]'RIAL,
like a dictator: absolute: authoritative.--_adv._ DICTAT[=O]'RIALLY.--_ns._
DICT[=A]'TORSHIP, DIC'TATURE.--_adj._ DIC'TATORY. [L. _dict[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_dic[)e]re_, to say.]

DICTION, dik'shun, _n._ a saying or speaking: manner of speaking or
expressing: choice of words: style. [L., from _dic[)e]re_, _dictum_, to
say.]

DICTIONARY, dik'shun-a-ri, _n._ a book containing the words of a language
alphabetically arranged, with their meanings, etymology, &c.: a lexicon: a
work containing information on any department of knowledge, alphabetically
arranged. [Low L. _dictionarium_. See DICTION.]

DICTUM, dik'tum, _n._ something said: a saying: an authoritative
saying:--_pl._ DIC'TA. [L.]

DICTYOGEN, dik'ti-o-jen, _n._ a plant with net-veined leaves. [Gr.
_diktyon_, a net; _-gen[=e]s_, producing.]

DICYNODONT, di-sin'o-dont, _n._ an extinct reptile, allied to tortoises on
one hand and mammals on the other. [Formed from Gr. _di-_, two, _cy[=o]n_,
dog, and _odous_, _odontos_, tooth.]

DID, did, DIDST, didst, _pa.t._ of DO.

DIDACHE, did'a-k[=e], _n._ the Teaching of the Twelve Apostles (see under
APOSTLE). [Gr., 'teaching.']

DIDACTIC, -AL, di-dak'tik, -al, _adj._ fitted or intended to teach:
instructive: perceptive.--_adv._ DIDAC'TICALLY.--_n._
DIDAC'TICISM.--_n.pl._ DIDACTICS, the art or science of teaching. [Gr.
_didaktikos_--_didaskein_, to teach; akin to L. _doc-[=e]re_,
_disc-[)e]re_.]

DIDACTYL, d[=i]-dak'til, _adj._ having only two digits--also
DIDAC'TYLOUS.--_n._ DIDAC'TYL, an animal with two toes only on each foot.

DIDAPPER, did'ap-[.e]r, _n._ a water-bird that is constantly dipping or
diving under water--also called the _Dabchick_. [A compound of _dive_ and
_dapper_ (which is a variant of _dipper_). See DIP and DIVE.]

DIDASCALIC, did-as-kal'ik, _adj._ didactic.

DIDDER, did'[.e]r, _v.i._ (_prov._) to shake.

DIDDLE, did'l, _v.t._ to cajole, swindle.--_n._ DIDD'LER.

DIDECAHEDRAL, d[=i]-dek-a-h[=e]'dral, _adj._ (_crystal._), having five
planes on each extremity.

DIDELPHIA, d[=i]-del'fi-a, _n.pl._ the marsupialia, or marsupial
implacental mammals, one of the three sub-classes of Mammalia.--_adjs._
DIDEL'PHIAN, DIDEL'PHIC. [Gr. _di-_, double, _delphys_, womb.]

DIDO, d[=i]'d[=o], _n._ (_slang_) an antic caper.--CUT UP DIDOES, to behave
in an extravagant way.

DIDODECAHEDRAL, d[=i]-do-dek-a-h[=e]'dral, _adj._ of a six-sided-prism,
truncated on the lateral edges, and acuminated on the extremities with six
planes.

DIDRACHMA, d[=i]-drak'ma, _n._ a double drachma.

DIDUCTION, d[=i]-duk'shun, _n._ separation by withdrawing one part from the
other.

DIDUNCULUS, di-dung'k[=u]-lus, _n._ a remarkable genus of pigeons--the
tooth-billed pigeon of Samoa.

DIDYMIUM, d[=i]-dim'i-um, _n._ a supposed element discovered in 1841, so
named from being, as it were, _twin_ brother of lanthamum.

DIDYMOUS, did'i-mus, _adj._ twin.

DIDYNAMIA, did-i-n[=a]'mi-a, _n._ a class of plants in the Linnæan system
having in the flower four stamens in pairs of unequal length.--_adjs._
DIDYN[=A]'MIAN, DIDYN'AMOUS. [Gr. _di-_, double, _dynamis_, strength.]

DIE, d[=i], _v.i._ to lose life: to perish: to wither: to languish: to
become insensible:--_pr.p._ dy'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ died
(d[=i]d).--_adj._ DIE'-AWAY', languishing.--DIE AWAY, to disappear by
degrees, become gradually inaudible; DIE GAME, to keep up one's spirit to
the last; DIE HARD, to struggle hard against death, to be long in dying;
DIE OFF, to die quickly or in large numbers; DIE OUT, to become extinct, to
disappear. [From a Scand. root seen in Ice. _deyja_, Dan. _d[ö]e_, Scot.
_dee_; akin to Mid. High Ger. _touwen_, whence Ger. _tod_, _todt_. The A.S.
word is _steorfan_, whence our _starve_.]

DIE, d[=i], _n._ a small cube used in gaming by being thrown from a box:
any small cubical body: hazard:--_pl._ DICE (d[=i]s).--_n._
DICE'-BOX.--_adj._ DICED, ornamented with square or diamond-shaped
figures.--_ns._ DICE'-PLAY; DICE'-PLAY'ER, D[=I]'CER;
D[=I]'CING-HOUSE.--THE DIE IS CAST, the question is decided. [O. Fr. _det_,
pl. _dez_ (Prov. _dat_, It. _dado_), from Low L. _dadus_--L. _d[=a]tus_,
given or cast (_talus_, a piece of bone used in play, being understood).
Doublets, _dado_, _date_.]

DIE, d[=i], _n._ a stamp for impressing coin, &c.: the cubical part of a
pedestal:--_pl._ DIES (d[=i]z).--_ns._ DIE'-SINK'ER; DIE'-SINK'ING, the
engraving of dies; DIE'-STOCK, a contrivance for holding the dies used in
screw-cutting; DIE'-WORK, ornamentation of a metal surface by impressions
with a die. [See above.]

DIEB, d[=e]b, _n._ a jackal of northern Africa.

DIEGESIS, d[=i]-e-j[=e]'sis, _n._ (_rhet._) in an oration, the narration of
the facts. [Gr.]

DIELECTRIC, d[=i]-e-lek'trik, _adj._ non-conducting: transmitting electric
effects without conducting.--_n._ a substance through which electric force
acts. [Gr. _dia_, through, and _electric_.]

DIELYTRA, d[=i]-el'i-tra, _n._ an erroneous name for _dicentra_.

DIESIS, d[=i]'e-sis, _n._ (_mus._) the difference in tone between a major
and a minor semitone: (_print._) the double dagger (++).

DIES IRÆ, d[=i]'[=e]z [=i]'r[=e], _n._ the name given (from the opening
words) to a famous hymn on the last judgment (_c._ 1250 A.D.). [L., 'day of
wrath.']

DIES NON, d[=i]'[=e]z non, a day on which law courts may not be held. [From
L. _dies non juridicus_, same as _dies nefastus_, an unlawful day.]

DIET, d[=i]'et, _n._ mode of living, with especial reference to food: food
prescribed by a physician: allowance of provisions.--_v.t._ to furnish with
food.--_v.i._ to eat: to take food according to rule.--_n._ DIET[=A]'RIAN,
one who observes prescribed rules for diet.--_adj._ D[=I]'ETARY, pertaining
to diet or the rules of diet.--_n._ course of diet: allowance of food, esp.
in large institutions.--_ns._ D[=I]'ET-DRINK, medicated liquor; D[=I]'ETER
(_Shak._), one who diets or prepares food by rule.--_adjs._ DIETET'IC, -AL,
pertaining to diet.--_adv._ DIETET'ICALLY.--_ns._ DIETET'ICS, rules for
regulating diet; DIETET'IST, one who lays stress on diet; D[=I]'ETIST, an
authority on diet. [Fr. _diète_--Low L. _diæta_--Gr. _diaita_, mode of
living, diet.]

DIET, d[=i]'et, _n._ an assembly of princes and delegates, the chief
national council in several countries in Europe: (_Scots law_) the
proceedings under a criminal libel: a clerical or ecclesiastical function
in Scotland, a _diet of worship_.--_n._ D[=I]'ETINE, a minor or local
diet.--DESERT THE DIET, to abandon criminal proceedings under a particular
libel--in Scotch usage. [O. Fr. _diete_--Low L. _diæta_--Gr. _diaita_; or
acc. to Littré, from L. _dies_, a (set) day, with which usage cf. Ger.
_tag_, a day, _reichstag_.]

DIFFARREATION, di-far-[=e]-[=a]'shun, _n._ the parting of a cake of
spelt--a ceremony at a Roman divorce. [L.]

DIFFER, dif'[.e]r, _v.i._ to be unlike, distinct, or various (used by
itself, or followed by _with_, _from_, _to_): to disagree (with _from_,
_with_): to fall out, dispute (_with_):--_pr.p._ diff'ering; _pa.p._
diff'ered.--_ns._ DIFF'ERENCE, DIFF'ERENCY (_Shak._), dissimilarity: the
quality distinguishing one thing from another: a contention or quarrel: the
point in dispute: the excess of one quantity or number over another:
(_her._) the modification of an achievement of arms to indicate the
wearer's relation to the head of the house, as by marks of cadency.--_v.t._
to make a difference between things.--_adj._ DIFF'ERENT, distinct:
separate: unlike: not the same (with _from_, not _to_).--_n._ DIFFEREN'TIA
(_logic_), the characteristic quality or attribute of a species.--_adj._
DIFFEREN'TIAL, creating a difference: special: (_math._) pertaining to a
quantity or difference infinitely small (see CALCULUS).--_adv._
DIFFEREN'TIALLY.--_v.t._ DIFFEREN'TI[=A]TE, to make different: to create a
difference between: to classify as different.--_v.i._ to become different
by specialisation: (_math._) to obtain the differential or differential
coefficient of.--_n._ DIFFERENTI[=A]'TION, the act of distinguishing or
describing a thing by giving its differentia: exact definition: a change by
which organs or structures become specialised or modified: (_math._) the
act or process of differentiating.--_adv._ DIFF'ERENTLY.--DIFFERENTIAL
GEAR, gear for communicating differential motion; DIFFERENTIAL MOTION, an
apparatus by which the difference of two velocities is communicated, as in
the DIFFERENTIAL SCREW, a combination of male and female screws;
DIFFERENTIAL THERMOMETER, a thermometer for marking minute differences of
temperature. [L. _differre_--_dif_ (= _dis_), apart, _ferre_, to bear.]

DIFFICULT, dif'i-kult, _adj._ not easy: hard to be done: requiring labour
and pains: hard to please: not easily persuaded.--_adv._
DIFF'ICULTLY.--_n._ DIFF'ICULTY, laboriousness: obstacle: objection: that
which cannot be easily understood or believed: embarrassment of affairs: a
quarrel. [The adj. was formed from _difficulty_, in place of the old form
_difficile_. Fr. _difficulté_--L. _difficultas_ =
_difficilitas_--_difficilis_--_dif_ (= _dis_), neg., and _facilis_, easy.]

DIFFIDENT, dif'i-dent, _adj._ wanting faith in: distrustful of one's self:
modest: bashful.--_n._ DIFF'IDENCE, want of confidence: want of
self-reliance: modesty: bashfulness.--_adv._ DIFF'IDENTLY. [L., pr.p. of
_diffid[)e]re_, to distrust--_dif_ (= _dis_), neg., _f[=i]d[)e]re_, to
trust--_f[)i]des_, faith.]

DIFFLUENT, dif'loo-ent, _adj._ tending to flow away readily.

DIFFORM, dif'orm, _adj._ not uniform, irregular in form.--_n._ DIFFOR'MITY.

DIFFRACT, dif-frakt', _v.t._ to break or separate into parts, as rays of
light.--_n._ DIFFRAC'TION, a name for certain phenomena connected with
light passing through a narrow opening or by the edge of an opaque body:
the spreading of the rays, with interference phenomena, coloured and
other.--_adj._ DIFFRAC'TIVE.--_n._ DIFFRANGIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ DIFFRAN'GIBLE.
[L. _diffring[)e]re_, _diffractum_--_dis_, asunder, _frang[)e]re_, to
break.]

DIFFUSE, dif-[=u]z', _v.t._ to pour out all round: to send out in all
directions: to scatter: to circulate: to publish.--_v.i._ to spread, as a
liquid does.--_pa.p._ and _adj._ DIFFUSED', spread widely: loose.--_adv._
DIFFUS'EDLY.--_ns._ DIFFUS'EDNESS; DIFFUS'ER; DIFFUSIBIL'ITY.--_adj._
DIFFUS'IBLE, that may be diffused.--_ns._ DIFF[=U]'SION, a spreading or
scattering abroad: extension: distribution: in the case of gases or liquids
in contact, mixture through each other; DIFF[=U]'SION-TUBE, an instrument
for determining the rate of diffusion for different gases.--_adj._
DIFFUS'IVE, extending: spreading widely.--_adv._ DIFFUS'IVELY.--_n._
DIFFUS'IVENESS. [L. _diffund[)e]re_, _diff[=u]sum_--_dif_ (= _dis_),
asunder, _fund[)e]re_, to pour out.]

DIFFUSE, dif-[=u]s', _adj._ diffused: widely spread: wordy: not
concise.--_adv._ DIFFUSE'LY.--_n._ DIFFUSE'NESS.

DIG, dig, _v.t._ to excavate: to turn up the earth: to cultivate with a
spade: to poke or thrust, as one's elbow into another's side, or spurs into
a horse.--_v.i._ to till the ground; to occupy one's self in digging;
(_U.S. slang_) to study hard:--_pr.p._ dig'ging; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ dug,
(_B._) digged.--_n._ a thrust, a poke: (_U.S. slang_) a hard
student.--_adj._ DIG'GABLE, that may be dug.--_n._ DIG'GER, a person or
animal that digs: a machine for digging, as a _steam-digger_.--_n.pl._
DIG'GINGS, places where mining is carried on, esp. for gold: (_slang_,
orig. American) lodgings, rooms.--DIG IN, to cover over by digging: to work
hard; DIG OUT (_U.S. slang_), to decamp.--DIGGER INDIANS, degraded Indian
tribes of California and Nevada, who live by digging roots. [Prob. O. Fr.
_diguer_, to dig; of Teut. origin.]

DIGAMMA, d[=i]-gam'ma, _n._ an obsolete letter of the Greek alphabet,
having the force of our W. [So called from its form ([Digamma]), like one
capital [Gamma] (gamma) placed over another.]

DIGAMY, dig'a-mi, _n._ a second marriage.--_n._ DIG'AMIST.--_adj._
DIG'AMOUS (_bot._), androgynous. [Gr. _dis_, twice, and _gamos_, marriage.]

DIGASTRIC, d[=i]-gas'trik, _adj._ double-bellied, or fleshy at each end, as
is one of the muscles of the lower jaw. [Gr. _di-_, double, _gast[=e]r_,
the belly.]

DIGENESIS, d[=i]-jen'e-sis, _n._ reproduction by two methods, a sexual
followed by an assexual.--_adj._ DIGENET'IC.

DIGEST, di-jest', _v.t._ to dissolve food in the stomach: to soften by heat
and moisture: to distribute and arrange: to prepare or classify in the
mind: to think over.--_v.i._ to be dissolved in the stomach: to be softened
by heat and moisture.--_adv._ DIGEST'EDLY.--_n._ DIGEST'ER, one who
digests: a close vessel in which by heat and pressure strong extracts are
made from animal and vegetable substances.--_n._ DIGESTIBIL'ITY.--_adj._
DIGEST'IBLE, that may be digested.--_n._ DIGES'TION, the dissolving of the
food in the stomach: orderly arrangement: exposing to slow heat,
&c.--_adj._ DIGEST'IVE, pertaining to digestion: promoting
digestion.--_adv._ DIGEST'IVELY. [L. _diger[)e]re_, _digestum_, to carry
asunder or dissolve--_di_ (= _dis_), asunder, and _ger[)e]re_, to bear.]

DIGEST, d[=i]'jest, _n._ a body of laws collected and arranged, esp. the
Justinian code of civil laws. [L. _digesta_, neut. pl. of _digestus_, pa.p.
of _diger[)e]re_, to carry apart, to arrange.]

DIGHT, d[=i]t, _adj._ disposed, adorned.--_adv._ finely.--Also DIGHT'LY.
[A.S. _dihtan_, to arrange, prescribe, from L. _dict[=a]re_, to dictate,
whence Ger. _dichten_, to write poetry, and the Scotch verb _dight_, to
dress, used of stones, flour, &c.]

DIGIT, dij'it, _n._ a finger's breadth or ¾ inch: from the habit of
counting on the fingers, any one of the nine numbers: the twelfth part of
the diameter of the sun or moon.--_adj._ DIG'ITAL, pertaining to the
fingers.--_n._ finger: a key of a piano, &c.--_ns._ DIGIT[=A]'LIA,
DIG'ITALINE, DIG'ITALIN, the active principles of digitalis; DIGIT[=A]'LIS,
a genus of plants, including the foxglove; DIGIT[=A]'RIA, a genus of
grasses with digitate spikes.--_adjs._ DIGITATE, -D, consisting of several
finger-like sections.--_adv._ DIG'ITATELY.--_n._ DIGIT[=A]'TION,
finger-like arrangement: a finger-like process.--_adj._ DIGIT'IFORM, formed
like fingers; DIG'ITIGRADE, walking on the toes.--_n._ an animal that walks
on its toes, as the lion--opp. to _Plantigrade_.--_ns._ DIG'ITIGRADISM;
DIGIT[=O]'RIUM, a small portable instrument used for making the fingers
flexible for piano-playing. [L. _digitus_, a finger or toe, akin to Gr.
_daktylos_.]

DIGLYPH, d[=i]'glif, _n._ (_archit._) an ornament consisting of a double
groove.

DIGNIFY, dig'ni-f[=i], _v.t._ to invest with honour: to exalt:--_pr.p._
dig'nifying; _pa.p._ dig'nified.--_n._ DIGNIFIC[=A]'TION.--_adj._
DIG'NIFIED, marked with dignity: exalted: noble: grave. [Low L.
_dignific[=a]re_--_dignus_, worthy, _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

DIGNITY, dig'ni-ti, _n._ the state of being dignified: elevation of mind or
character: grandeur of mien: elevation in rank, place, &c.: degree of
excellence: preferment: high office: a dignitary.--_n._ DIG'NITARY, one in
a dignified position or rank, esp. in the church. [Fr. _dignité_--L.
_dignitas_--_dignus_, worthy.]

DIGRAPH, d[=i]'graf, _n._ two letters expressing but one sound, as _ph_ in
_digraph_. [Gr. _di-_, twice, _graph[=e]_, a mark, a character--_graphein_,
to write.]

DIGRESS, di-gres', _v.i._ to step aside or go from the main subject: to
introduce irrelevant matter.--_n._ DIGRES'SION, a going from the main
point: a part of a discourse not upon the main subject.--_adjs._
DIGRES'SIONAL, DIGRESS'IVE, of the nature of a digression: departing from
the main subject.--_adv._ DIGRESS'IVELY. [L. _digredi_, _digressus_--_di_,
aside, _gradi_, to step. See GRADE.]

DIGYNIA, d[=i]-jin'i-a, _n._ an order of plants having in the flower two
styles or a deeply cleft style.--_adjs._ DIGYN'IAN, DIG'YNOUS. [Gr. _dis_,
twice, and _gyn[=e]_, a woman.]

DIHEDRAL, d[=i]-h[=e]'dral, _adj._ having two sides, or two plane
faces--also DI[=E]'DRAL.--_n._ DIH[=E]'DRON. [Gr. _di-_, two, _hedra_, a
seat.]

DIHEXAGONAL, d[=i]-heks-ag'[=o]-nal, _adj._ twelve-sided.

DIHEXAHEDRAL, d[=i]-heks-a-h[=e]'dral, _adj._ pertaining to a six-sided
prism having three planes on the extremities.--_n._ DIHEXAH[=E]'DRON.

DIJUDICATE, d[=i]-j[=oo]'di-k[=a]t, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to judge between two:
to decide.--_n._ DIJUDIC[=A]'TION. [L. _di_, asunder, and _judic[=a]re_,
judge.]

DIKE, d[=i]k, _n._ a trench, or the earth dug out and thrown up: a ditch: a
mound raised to prevent inundation: in Scotland, a wall (_Dry-stane dike_,
a wall without mortar; _Fail-dike_, a wall of turf), sometimes even a
thorn-hedge: (_geol._) a wall-like mass of igneous rock in the fissures of
stratified rocks.--_v.t._ to surround with a dike or bank. [A.S. _díc_;
Dut. _dijk_, Ger. _teich_, a pond; perh. conn. with Gr. _teichos_, a wall
or rampart. See DIG, _Ditch_.]

DILACERATE, di-las'[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to rend or tear asunder.--_n._
DILACER[=A]'TION. [L. _di_, asunder, and _lacerate_.]

DILAPIDATE, di-lap'i-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to pull stone from stone: to lay waste:
to suffer to go to ruin.--_adj._ DILAP'IDATED, in ruins.--_ns._
DILAPID[=A]'TION, the state of ruin: impairing of church property during an
incumbency: (_pl._) money paid at the end of an incumbency by the incumbent
or his heirs for the purpose of putting the parsonage, &c. in good repair
for the succeeding incumbent; DILAP'IDATOR. [L. _dilapid[=a]re_--_di_,
asunder, _lapis_, _lapidis_, a stone.]

DILATE, di-l[=a]t', _v.t._ to spread out in all directions: to enlarge: the
opposite of _contract_.--_v.i._ to widen: to swell out: to speak at
length.--_ns._ DIL[=A]TABIL'ITY, DIL[=A]T'ANCY, DILAT[=A]'TION,
DIL[=A]'TION, expansion.--_adjs._ DIL[=A]T'ABLE, that may be dilated or
expanded; DIL[=A]'TANT.--_ns._ D[=I]'LAT[=A]TOR, DIL[=A]T'OR,
DIL[=A]T'ER.--_adj._ DIL[=A]T'IVE. [L. _dilatus_ (used as pa.p. of
_differre_), from _di_ (= _dis_), apart, and _latus_, borne.]

DILATORY, dil'a-tor-i, _adj._ slow: given to procrastination: loitering:
tending to delay.--_adv._ DIL'ATORILY.--_n._ DIL'ATORINESS. [L.
_dilatorius_, extending or putting off (time). See DILATE.]

DILEMMA, di-lem'a, _n._ a form of argument in which the maintainer of a
certain proposition is committed to accept one of two alternative
propositions each of which contradicts his original contention: a position
where each of two alternative courses (or of all the feasible courses) is
eminently undesirable: a trying practical difficulty. The argument was
called a 'horned syllogism,' and the victim compared to a man certain to be
impaled on one or other of the horns of an infuriated bull, hence the HORNS
OF A DILEMMA: the usual phrase LANDED IN A DILEMMA is, or suggests, a mixed
metaphor.--_adj._ DILEMMAT'IC. [L.,--Gr. _dil[=e]mma_--_di-_, twice,
double, _l[=e]mma_, an assumption--_lambanein_, to take.]

DILETTANTE, dil-et-an'te, _n._ one who loves the fine arts, but in a
superficial way and without serious purpose (the _amateur_ usually
practises them): a dabbler in art, science, or literature:--_pl._
DILETTAN'TI ('T[=E]).--_adj._ DILETTAN'TISH.--_ns._ DILETTAN'TISM,
DILETTAN'TEISM. [It., pr.p. of _dilettare_, to take delight in--L.
_delect[=a]re_, to delight.]

DILIGENT, dil'i-jent, _adj._ steady and earnest in application:
industrious.--_n._ DIL'IGENCE, steady application: industry: (_Scots law_)
a warrant to produce witnesses, books, &c., or a process by which persons
or goods are attached: a French or continental stage-coach (also pronounced
d[=e]-l[=e]-zhongs)--also DILL'Y.--_adv._ DIL'IGENTLY. [Fr.,--_diligens_,
_-entis_, pr.p. of L. _dilig[)e]re_, to choose.]

DILL, dil, _n._ an umbelliferous annual, the seeds used in medicine.--_n._
DILL'-WA'TER, a stomachic and carminative. [A.S. _dile_; Ger. and Sw.
_dill_.]

DILLING, dil'ing, _n._ a darling: the youngest child, the weakling of a
litter.

DILLY-BAG, dil'i-bag, _n._ an Australian native-made rush or
bark-bag.--Also DILL'I, DILL'Y.

DILLY-DALLY, dil'i-dal'i, _v.i._ to loiter, trifle. [A kind of
reduplication of _dally_. Cf. SHILLY-SHALLY.]

DILOGY, dil'[=o]-ji, _n._ repetition: intentional ambiguity.--_adj._
DILOG'ICAL.

DILUCIDATE, di-l[=u]'si-d[=a]t, _v.t._ (_obs._) to elucidate.--_adj._
DIL[=U]'CID.--_n._ DILUCID[=A]'TION.

DILUTE, dil-[=u]t', _v.t._ to make thinner or more liquid: to diminish the
strength, flavour, &c. of, by mixing, esp. with water.--_v.i._ to become
mixed.--_adj._ diminished in strength by mixing with water.--_adj._
DIL'UENT, diluting.--_n._ that which dilutes.--_ns._ DILUTE'NESS;
DIL[=U]'TION. [L. _dilu[)e]re_, _dil[=u]tum_--_di_, away from, _lu[)e]re_,
to wash.]

DILUVIUM, dil-[=u]'vi-um, _n._ an inundation or flood: (_geol._) a deposit
of sand, gravel, &c. made by extraordinary currents of water--also
DIL[=U]'VION.--_adjs._ DIL[=U]'VIAL, DIL[=U]'VIAN, pertaining to a flood,
esp. that in the time of Noah: caused by a deluge: composed of
diluvium.--_n._ DIL[=U]'VIALIST, one who explains geological phenomena by
the Flood. [L. _diluvium_--_dilu[)e]re_.]

DIM, dim, _adj._ not bright or distinct: obscure: mysterious: not seeing
clearly.--_v.t._ to make dark: to obscure.--_v.i._ to become dim:--_pr.p._
dim'ming; _pa.p._ dimmed.--_adv._ DIM'LY.--_adj._ DIM'MISH, somewhat
dim.--_n._ DIM'NESS. [A.S. _dim_; akin to Ice. _dimmr_, dark, and Ger.
_dämmerung_, twilight.]

DIME, d[=i]m, _n._ the tenth part of an American dollar, 10 cents, nearly
equal to 5d.--DIME MUSEUM, a cheap show; DIME NOVEL, a cheap novel, usually
sensational. [Fr., orig. _disme_, from L. _decima_ (_pars_, a part, being
understood), a tenth part.]

DIMENSION, di-men'shun, _n._ usually in _pl._, measure in length, breadth,
and thickness (the three dimensions of space): extent: size.--_adjs._
DIMEN'SIONAL, concerning dimension (one-dimensional, two-dimensional,
three-dimensional space = space of one, two, three dimensions);
DIMEN'SIONED, having dimension; DIMEN'SIONLESS.--DIMENSION WORK, masonry in
stones of specified size.--FOURTH DIMENSION, an additional dimension
attributed to space by a hypothetical speculation. [Fr.,--L.
_dimensio_--_dimet[=i]ri_, _dimensus_--_di_(= _dis_), apart, _met[=i]ri_,
to measure.]

DIMEROUS, dim'e-rus, _adj._ consisting of two parts: (_bot._) with two
members in each whorl: (_entom._) having two-jointed tarsi.--_n._
DIM'ERISM. [Gr., _di-_, double, _meros_, a part.]

DIMETER, dim'e-t[.e]r, _adj._ containing two metres or measures.--_n._ a
verse of two measures. [L.,--Gr. _dimetros_--_di-_, twice, _metron_, a
measure.]

DIMETHYLANILINE, di-meth-il-an'i-lin, _n._ an oily liquid: aniline heated
with methyl alcohol and hydrochloric acid--from which dyes are obtained.
[L. _di-_, twice, _methyl_, and _aniline_.]

DIMETRIC, d[=i]-met'rik, _adj._ (_crystal._) tetragonal.

DIMIDIATE, di-mid'i-[=a]t, _adj._ divided into halves: having a shape that
appears as if halved.--_v.t._ (_her._) to represent the half of.--_n._
DIMIDI[=A]'TION. [L. _dimidi[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to halve--_dimidius_;
half--_dis_, twice, _medius_, the middle.]

DIMINISH, di-min'ish, _v.t._ to make less: to take a part from: to
degrade.--_v.i._ to grow or appear less: to subside.--_adj._
DIMIN'ISHABLE.--_p.adj._ DIMIN'ISHED, made smaller, humbled: (_mus._)
lessened by a half-step, as an interval.--_adv._ DIMIN'ISHINGLY. [Coined by
adding _di_ to the word _minish_, an imitation of L. _diminu[)e]re_--_di_ =
_dis_, apart, _minu[)e]re_, to make less.]

DIMINUENDO, di-min-[=u]-en'd[=o], _adv._ (_mus._) a direction to let the
sound die away, marked thus [Diminuendo symbol]. [It.,--L. _diminuendus_,
fut. part. pass. of _diminu[)e]re_, _dimin[=u]tum_, to lessen.]

DIMINUTION, dim-in-[=u]'shun, _n._ a lessening: degradation.--_adj._
DIMIN'UTIVE, of a diminished size: small: contracted.--_n._ (_gram._) a
word formed from another to express a little one of the kind.--_adv._
DIMIN'UTIVELY.--_n._ DIMIN'UTIVENESS.

DIMISSORY, dim'is-or-i, _adj._ sending away or giving leave to depart to
another jurisdiction. [L. _dimissorius_--_dimitt[)e]re_, _dimissum_.]

DIMITY, dim'i-ti, _n._ a kind of stout white cotton cloth, striped or
figured in the loom by weaving with two threads. [Through the L., from Gr.
_dimitos_--_di-_, twice, _mitos_, a thread.]

DIMORPHISM, d[=i]-mor'fizm, _n._ (_bot._) a state in which two forms of
flower, leaf, &c. are produced by the same species of plant: the property
of crystallising in two forms.--_adjs._ DIMOR'PHIC, DIMOR'PHOUS. [Gr.
_di-_, twice, _morph[=e]_, form.]

DIMPLE, dim'pl, _n._ a small hollow: a small natural depression on the
face.--_v.i._ to form dimples.--_v.t._ to mark with dimples.--_p.adj._
DIM'PLED.--_n._ DIM'PLEMENT.--_adj._ DIM'PLY. [Dim. of _dip_, with inserted
_m_. Another dim. is _dapple_.]

DIMYARIAN, dim-i-[=a]'ri-an, _adj._ double-muscled (of bivalve shells like
the clam)--also DIM'YARY.--_n.pl._ DIMY[=A]'RIA. [Gr. _di-_, two, _mys_, a
muscle.]

DIN, din, _n._ a loud continued noise.--_v.t._ to assail (the ears) with
noise: to annoy with clamour: to obtrude noisily (as to din one's
complaints into their ears):--_pr.p._ din'ning; _pa.p._ dinned.--_adj._
DIN'FUL. [A.S. _dyn_, _dyne_; cf. Ice. _dynr_, Dan. _dön_, noise.]

DINANDERIE, d[=e]-nong'de-r[=e], _n._ domestic utensils of copper, esp.
such as are quaint and artistic--applied also to Indian and Levantine
brass-ware. [Fr., from _Dinant_ in Belgium.]

DINAR, d[=e]-när', _n._ an ancient Arab gold coin of 65 grains weight. [L.
_denarius_.]

DINARCHY. See DIARCHY.

DINDLE. See DINNLE.

DINE, d[=i]n, _v.i._ to take dinner.--_v.t._ to give a dinner to.--_n._
(_obs._) dinner-time.--_ns._ DIN'ER-OUT, one who goes much to
dinner-parties; DINETTE', a preliminary dinner, luncheon; DIN'ING-HALL;
DIN'ING-ROOM; DIN'ING-T[=A]'BLE.--DINE OUT, to dine elsewhere than at home;
DINE WITH DUKE HUMPHREY, to go without a meal, like those who, unable to
procure a dinner, loitered about Duke Humphrey's Walk in Old St Paul's. [O.
Fr. _disner_ (Fr. _dîner_)--Low L. _disjun[=a]re_, for _disjejun[=a]re_, to
break one's fast--L. _dis-_, and _jejunus_, fasting (cf. _Déjeuner_).
Others explain _disnare_ as from _decen[=a]re_--L. _de_, inten., and
_cen[=a]re_, to dine.]

DING, ding, _v.t._ to throw, dash, or hurl: to beat: (_arch._) to urge or
enforce: (_Scot._) to defeat, non-plus--also, as _v.i._, to be defeated: to
descend, fall, as of continued heavy rain or snow falling.--DING DOUN
(_Scot._), to knock or throw down. [M. E. _dingen_; cf. Ice. _dengja_, Sw.
_dänga_, to bang.]

DING, ding, _v.i._ to ring, keep sounding.--_v.t._ to reiterate to a
wearisome degree.--_n._ DING'-DONG, the sound of bells ringing: monotony:
sameness. [Imit. Cf. RING.]

DINGLE, ding'gl, _n._ a little hollow or narrow valley. [Prob. conn. with
_dimple_ and _dip_.]

DINGLE-DANGLE, ding'gl-dang'gl, _adv._ hanging loose: swinging backwards
and forwards. [A duplication of DANGLE.]

DINGO, ding'g[=o], _n._ the native dog of Australia.

DINGY, DINGEY, ding'gi, _n._ the smallest ship's boat: in India, a canoe.
[Beng. _ding[=i]_, a boat.]

DINGY, din'ji, _adj._ of a dim or dark colour: dull: soiled.--_n._
DIN'GINESS. [Acc. to Skeat = _dungy_.]

DINIC, din'ik, _adj._ relating to vertigo or dizziness.--_n._ a remedy for
dizziness. [Gr. _dinos_, whirling.]

DINK, dingk, _adj._ (_Scot._) braw, trim.--_v.t._ to dress neatly.

DINMONT, din'mont, _n._ a Border name for a wether between the first and
second shearing.

DINNER, din'[.e]r, _n._ the chief meal of the day: a feast.--_ns._
DINNERETTE', a little dinner; DINN'ER-HOUR.--_adj._ DINN'ERLESS.--_ns._
DINN'ER-T[=A]'BLE; DINN'ER-TIME; DINN'ER-WAG'ON, a set of light movable
shelves for a dining-room. [O. Fr. _disner_, prop. breakfast. See DINE.]

DINNLE, din'l, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to tingle.--_n._ a thrill.--Also DIN'DLE.

DINOCERAS, d[=i]-nos'er-as, _n._ an extinct genus of mammals found in
Wyoming, approaching the elephant in size, and named from three pairs of
osseous protuberances on the skull. [Formed from Gr. _deinos_, terrible,
_keras_, horn.]

DINORNIS, d[=i]-nor'nis, _n._ a genus of large extinct birds, the bones of
which are found in New Zealand. [Formed from Gr. _deinos_, terrible, and
_ornis_, a bird.]

DINOSAUR, d[=i]'no-sawr, _n._ a gigantic extinct reptile, which attained a
length of eighty feet. [Formed from Gr. _deinos_, terrible, and _sauros_,
lizard.]

DINOTHERIUM, d[=i]-no-th[=e]'ri-um, _n._ an extinct animal of huge size,
with elephant-like tusks and trunk. [Gr. _deinos_, terrible, _th[=e]rion_,
a beast.]

DINT, dint, _n._ a blow or stroke: the mark of a blow (often DENT): force:
power (as in 'by dint of').--_v.t._ to make a dint in. [A.S. _dynt_, a
blow; Scot. _dunt_, a blow with a dull sound, Ice. _dyntr_.]

DIOCESE, d[=i]'[=o]-s[=e]s, _n._ the circuit or extent of a bishop's
jurisdiction.--_adj._ DIOCESAN (d[=i]-os'es-an, or d[=i]'[=o]-s[=e]-san),
pertaining to a diocese.--_n._ a bishop as regards his diocese: one of the
clergy in the diocese. [Through Fr. and L. from Gr. _dioik[=e]sis_,
_dioikein_, to keep house--_di_, for _dia_, sig. completeness, _oikein_, to
manage a household--_oikos_, a house.]

DIODON, d[=i]'o-don, _n._ a genus of globe-fishes which have all their
teeth consolidated on the jaws, so as to make them like the beak of a bird.
[Gr. _dis_, twice, double, _odous_, _odontos_, a tooth.]

DIOECIA, d[=i]-[=e]'shi-a, _n._ a class of plants having the stamens on one
plant and the pistils on another.--_adjs._ DIOE'CIOUS, DIOE'CIAN.--_adv._
DIOE'CIOUSLY.--_n._ DIOE'CIOUSNESS. [Gr. _di-_, twice, _oikos_, a house.]

DIOGENIC, d[=i]-o-jen'ik, _adj._ resembling the Cynic philosopher
_Diogenes_ (412-323 B.C.), cynical.

DIONÆA, d[=i]-[=o]-n[=e]'a, _n._ Venus's fly-trap: an American
insectivorous plant. [L., from Gr., a name of Aphrodite or Venus, from her
mother _Di[=o]n[=e]_.]

DIONYSIA, d[=i]-o-niz'i-a, _n.pl._ dramatic and orgiastic festivals in
honour of _Dionysus_ (Bacchus), god of wine.--_adjs._ DIONYS'IAC,
DIONYS'IAN.

DIOPHANTINE, d[=i]-o-fan't[=i]n, _adj._ pertaining to the Alexandrian
mathematician _Diophantus_ (c. 275 A.D.).--DIOPHANTINE ANALYSIS, the part
of algebra which treats of finding particular rational values for general
expressions under a surd form.

DIOPSIDE, d[=i]-op'sid, _n._ a grayish and readily cleavable variety of
pyroxene. [Gr., _dia_, through, _opsis_, a view.]

DIOPSIS, d[=i]-op'sis, _n._ a genus of dipterous insects, of the fly
family.

DIOPTASE, d[=i]-op't[=a]s, _n._ emerald copper ore.

DIOPTRATE, d[=i]-op'tr[=a]t, _adj._ (_entom._) divided transversely.

[Illustration]

DIOPTRIC, -AL, d[=i]-op'trik, -al, _adj._ pertaining to dioptrics.--_ns._
DIOP'TER, an ancient form of theodolite: the index-arm of a graduated
circle; DIOP'TRICS, the part of optics which treats of the transmission of
light from one medium to another.--DIOPTRIC SYSTEM, in lighthouses (as
opposed to _reflecting system_), illumination from a central lamp whose
rays are transmitted through a combination of lenses. [Gr. _dia_, through,
_opt-_, as in _opsesthai_, to see, &c.]

DIORAMA, d[=i]-[=o]-rä'ma, _n._ an exhibition of pictures, illuminated, and
viewed through an opening in the wall of a darkened chamber.--_adj._
DIORAM'IC. [Gr. _dia_, through, _horama_, a sight.]

DIORISM, d[=i]'[=o]-rizm, _n._ distinction, definition.--_adjs._
DIORIS'TIC, -AL.--_adv._ DIORIS'TICALLY. [Gr. _diorizein_, to divide,
_dia_, through, _horos_, a boundary.]

DIORITE, d[=i]'o-r[=i]t, _n._ a crystalline granular igneous rock composed
of feldspar and hornblende. [Gr. _diorizein_, to distinguish--_dia_,
through, _horos_, a boundary.]

DIORTHOSIS, d[=i]-or-th[=o]'sis, _n._ (_surg._) the reduction of a
dislocation, the correction of a deformity: a critical revision of a
text.--_adj._ DIORTHROT'IC. [Gr., _dia_, through, _orthos_, straight.]

DIOSCOREA, di-os-k[=o]r'e-a, _n._ a genus of twining plants, containing the
yams.--_n._ DIOSCOR[=A]'CEÆ, the order to which Dioscorea belongs.--_adj._
DIOSCOR[=A]'CEOUS. [From the 1st-cent. Greek physician _Dioscorides_.]

DIOSCURI, di-os-k[=u]'ri, _n.pl._ Castor and Pollux, as sons of Jupiter.
[Gr. _Dios_, gen. of Zeus (Jupiter), and _koros_ (Ion. _kouros_), a son, a
lad.]

DIOSMOSIS, d[=i]-oz-m[=o]'zis, _n._ the transfusion of a liquid through a
membrane.--Also DIOS'MOSE. [Gr. _dia_, through, _[=o]smos_, a
pushing--_[=o]thein_, to thrust.]

DIOTA, d[=i]-[=o]'ta, _n._ a two-handled Roman vase.

DIOTHELISM, d[=i]-oth'e-lizm, _n._ the doctrine that Christ during His life
on earth possessed two wills, a human and a divine--opp. to
_Monothelism_--also DYOTH'ELISM.--_n._ DIOTH'ELITE, one who holds this.

DIOXIDE, d[=i]-oks'[=i]d, _n._ an oxide containing two equivalents of
oxygen to one of a metal. [Gr. _di-_, twice, and _oxide_.]

DIP, dip, _v.t._ to dive or plunge into any liquid for a moment: to lower
and raise again (as a flag): to baptise by immersion.--_v.i._ to sink: to
enter slightly: to look cursorily: to incline downwards:--_pr.p._ dip'ping;
_pa.p._ dipped.--_n._ inclination downwards: a sloping: (_geol._) the angle
a stratum of rock makes with a horizontal plane: a bath: a candle made by
dipping a wick in tallow.--DIP OF THE HORIZON, the angle of the horizon
below the level of the eye; DIP OF THE NEEDLE, the angle a balanced
magnetic needle makes with the plane of the horizon, measured by the
DIPPING NEEDLE, or _Compass_. [A.S. _dyppan_, causal of _dýpan_, to plunge
in--_deóp_, deep; cf. Dan. _dyppe_; Ger. _taufen_, to immerse.]

DIPCHICK, dip'chik, _n._ Same as DABCHICK.

DIPETALOUS, d[=i]-pet'a-lus, _adj._ having two petals. [Gr. _di-_, twice,
and _petal_.]

DIPHTHERIA, dif-th[=e]'ri-a, _n._ a throat disease in which the
air-passages become covered and impeded with a leathery membrane, and a
dangerous fever is present.--_adj._ DIPHTHERIT'IC. [A coinage of 1859 from
Gr. _diphthera_, leather.]

DIPHTHONG, dif'thong, or dip'thong, _n._ two vowel-sounds pronounced as one
syllable.--_adj._ DIPHTHONG'AL, relating to a diphthong.--_adv._
DIPHTHONG'ALLY.--_n._ DIPHTHONG[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ DIPH'THONGISE. [Through
Fr. from Gr. _diphthongos_, with two sounds--_di-_, twice, _phthongos_,
sound.]

DIPHYCERCAL, dif-i-ser'kal, _adj._ having the tail symmetrical (of
fishes).--Also DIPH'YCERC. [Formed from Gr. _diphy[=e]s_, of double nature,
_kerkos_, a tail.]

DIPHYLLOUS, d[=i]-fil'us, _adj._ having two leaves. [Gr. _di-_, twice, and
_phyllon_, a leaf.]

DIPHYODONT, dif'i-[=o]-dont, _adj._ having two sets of teeth.--_n._ a
mammal possessing such.

DIPHYSITE, dif'i-s[=i]t, _n._ one who holds the doctrine of DIPH'YSITISM,
or the belief of the existence of two natures in Christ, a divine and a
human--opp. to _Monophysite_; less correctly DIOPH'YSITE, DIOPHYS'ITISM.
[Gr. _di-_, two, _physis_, nature.]

DIPLEIDOSCOPE, di-pl[=i]'d[=o]-sk[=o]p, _n._ an instrument for ascertaining
the moment of passage of the sun or a star over the meridian. [Formed from
Gr. _diploos_, double, _eidos_, appearance, _skopein_, to view.]

DIPLEX, d[=i]'pleks, _adj._ pertaining to the transmission of two
simultaneous messages over one wire in the same direction.

DIPLOE, dip'l[=o]-[=e], _n._ (_anat._) the spongy tissue between the hard
inner and outer tables of the skull.

DIPLOGENIC, dip-l[=o]-jen'ik, _adj._ producing two bodies.--_n._
DIPLOGEN'ESIS, the production in duplicate of parts normally single. [Gr.
_diploos_, double, _genesis_, generation.]

DIPLOMA, di-pl[=o]'ma, _n._ a writing conferring some honour or privilege,
as a university degree, &c.--_v.t._ to furnish with a diploma. [L.,--Gr.
_dipl[=o]ma_, a letter folded double--_diploos_, double.]

DIPLOMACY, di-pl[=o]'ma-si, _n._ the art of negotiation, esp. of treaties
between states: political skill.--_n._ DIPLOMAT'IC, a minister at a foreign
court: (_pl._) the science of deciphering ancient writings, as charters,
decrees, &c.--paleography.--_adjs._ DIPLOMAT'IC, -AL, pertaining to
diplomacy: skilful in negotiation.--_adv._ DIPLOMAT'ICALLY.--_v.i._ and
_v.t._ DIPL[=O]'MATISE, to practise, or effect by, diplomacy.--_ns._
DIPL[=O]'MATIST, DIP'L[=O]MAT, one skilled in diplomacy; DIPLOMATOL'OGY,
the study or science of diplomatics, charters, decrees, &c.--DIPLOMATIC
CORPS, or _Corps diplomatique_, the whole body of foreign diplomatists
resident at any court.

DIPLOPIA, dip'-l[=o]'pi-a, _n._ double vision.

DIPLOZOON, dip-l[=o]-z[=o]'on, _n._ a remarkable flat worm or Trematode,
consisting of two organisms fused together. [Gr. _diploos_, double,
_z[=o]on_, an animal.]

DIPNOI, dip'noi, _n.pl._ the lung fishes.--_adj._ DIP'NOOUS, having both
lungs and gills.

DIPODY, dip'o-di, _n._ (_pros._) a double foot.

DIPOLAR, d[=i]-p[=o]'lar, _adj._ having two poles.

DIPPER, dip'[.e]r, _n._ a genus of birds in the Thrush family that find
their food by diving into streams or lakes: a kind of Baptist or Dunker.

DIPRISMATIC, d[=i]-priz-mat'ik, _adj._ doubly prismatic.

DIPSACUS, dip'sa-kus, _n._ the teasel. [Gr. _dipsa_, thirst, because the
leaf-axils hold water.]

DIPSAS, dip'sas, _n._ a snake whose bite was believed to cause intense
thirst: a genus of non-venomous snakes. [Gr. _dipsas_--_dipsa_, thirst.]

DIPSECTOR, dip'sekt-or, _n._ an instrument for observing the dip of the
horizon. [_Dip_ and _sector_.]

DIPSOMANIA, dip-s[=o]-m[=a]'ni-a, _n._ a morbid craving for alcoholic
stimulants.--_ns._ DIPSOM[=A]'NIAC, one who suffers from the foregoing;
DIPSOP'ATHY, treatment by restricting a patient's drink; DIPS[=O]'SIS,
morbid thirst. [Gr. _dipsa_, thirst, and _mania_, madness.]

DIPTERA, dip'ter-a, _n.pl._ two-winged insects or flies.--_ns._ DIP'TERAN,
a dipterous insect; DIP'TEROS, a building with double peristyle or
colonnade.--_adjs._ DIP'TEROUS, DIP'TERAL. [Gr. _dipteros_, two-winged,
_di-_, twice, _pteron_, a wing.]

DIPTYCH, dip'tik, _n._ a double-folding writing-tablet: a register of
bishops, saints, &c. read aloud during the eucharist: a pair of pictures as
folding-tablets. [Gr. _diptychos_--_di-_, and _ptyssein_, to fold.]

DIRDUM, dir'dum, _n._ (_Scot._) uproar: a scolding.

DIRE, d[=i]r, _adj._ dreadful: calamitous in a high degree--(_poet._)
DIRE'FUL.--_adv._ DIRE'FULLY.--_n._ DIRE'FULNESS. [L. _dirus_; cf. Gr.
_deinos_, frightful.]

DIRECT, di-rekt', _adj._ quite straight: straightforward: in the line of
descent: outspoken: sincere: unambiguous: unsophisticated in
manner.--_v.t._ to keep or lay quite straight: to point or aim straightly
or correctly: to point out the proper course to: to guide: to order: to
mark with the name and residence of a person.--_v.i._ to act as
director.--_n._ DIREC'TION, aim at a certain point: the line of course in
which anything moves: guidance: command: the body of persons who guide or
manage a matter: the written name and residence of a person.--_adjs._
DIREC'TIONAL; DIRECT'IVE, having power or tendency to direct.--_adv._
DIRECT'LY, in a direct manner: without intermediary: immediately (in time
and otherwise).--_ns._ DIRECT'NESS; DIRECT'OR, one who directs: a manager
or governor: a counsellor: a father confessor or spiritual guide: part of a
machine or instrument which guides its motion:--_fem._ DIRECT'RESS,
DIRECT'RIX.--_ns._ DIRECT'OR[=A]TE, DIRECT'ORSHIP, the office, or a body
of, directors.--_adjs._ DIRECT[=O]'RIAL; DIRECT'ORY, containing directions:
guiding.--_n._ a body of directions: a guide: a book with the names and
residences of the inhabitants of a place: a body of directors: the
_Directoire_, or French Republican government of 1795-99.--_n._ DIRECT'RIX,
a line serving to describe a circle. [L. _dirig[)e]re_, _directum_--_di_,
apart, and _reg[)e]re_, to rule, to make straight.]

DIRGE, d[.e]rj, _n._ a funeral song or hymn. [Contracted from _dirige_, the
first word of an antiphon sung in the office for the dead--the words from
the Vulgate, Psalm v. 8. L. _dirig[)e]re_, to direct.]

DIRHEM, dir'hem, _n._ an oriental weight and silver coin, originally
two-thirds of an Attic drachma.--Also DIR'HAM, DER'HAM. [Ar., Pers., and
Turk. modifications of the Greek _drachm[=e]_, a drachma or dram.]

DIRIGIBLE, dir'i-ji-bl, _adj._ that can be directed.--_adj._ DIR'IGENT,
directing. [See DIRECT.]

DIRIMENT, dir'i-ment, _adj._ nullifying. [L. _dirim[)e]re_.]

DIRK, d[.e]rk, _n._ a Highland dagger or poniard: a side-arm worn by
midshipmen and cadets of the royal navy.--_v.t._ to stab with a dirk.
[Scot. _durk_; from the Celt., as in Ir. _duirc_.]

DIRK, d[.e]rk, _adj._ (_Spens._) dark.--_v.t._ (_Spens._) to darken. [See
DARK.]

DIRL, dirl, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to thrill, vibrate.--_n._ a vibration, a
sensation of tingling as after a blow.

DIRT, d[.e]rt, _n._ any filthy substance, such as dung, mud, &c.: loose
earth.--_v.t._ to make dirty.--_n._ DIRT'-BED, a quarryman's term for
several layers in the Purbeck group.--_adj._ DIRT'-CHEAP, cheap as dirt,
very cheap.--_n._ DIRT'-EATING, a practice of using some kinds of clay for
food, as among the Ottomacs of South America: a morbid impulse to eat dirt,
amongst negroes (_Cachexia Africana_) and pregnant women.--_adv._
DIRT'ILY.--_ns._ DIRT'INESS; DIRT'-PIE, clay moulded by children's hands in
the form of a pie.--_adjs._ DIRT'-ROTTEN (_Shak._), wholly decayed; DIRT'Y,
foul, filthy: unclean in thought or conversation: despicable: mean.--_v.t._
to soil with dirt: to sully:--_pr.p._ dirt'ying; _pa.p._ dirt'ied.--EAT
DIRT, submissively to acquiesce in a humiliation; THROW DIRT AT, to abuse
scurrilously or slanderously. [M. E. _drit_--Scand., Ice. _drit_,
excrement.]

DIS, dis, _n._ a name for Pluto, sometimes the infernal world. [L., cog.
with _deus_, _divus_.]

DISABLE, dis-[=a]'bl, _v.t._ to deprive of power: to weaken: to
disqualify.--_ns._ DIS[=A]'BLEMENT, DISABIL'ITY, want of power; want of
legal qualification: disqualification.

DISABUSE, dis-ab-[=u]z', _v.t._ to undeceive: to set right.

DISACCOMMODATE, dis-a-kom'[=o]-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to put to
inconvenience.--_n._ DISACCOMMOD[=A]'TION.

DISACCORD, dis-ak-kord', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to refuse to accord, to
dissent.--_adj._ DISACCORD'ANT.

DISACCUSTOM, dis-a-kus'tom, _v.t._ to make a habit to be lost through
disuse.

DISACKNOWLEDGE, dis-ak-nol'ej, _v.t._ to refuse to acknowledge, disown.

DISADORN, dis-a-dorn', _v.t._ to deprive of ornaments.

DISADVANCE, dis-ad-vans', _v.t._ to cause to retreat: (_Spens._) to draw
back.

DISADVANTAGE, dis-ad-vant'[=a]j, _n._ want of advantage: what is
unfavourable to one's interest: loss: injury.--_adjs._ DISADVAN'TAGEABLE
(_obs._); DISADVANT[=A]'GEOUS, attended with disadvantage:
unfavourable.--_adv._ DISADVANT[=A]'GEOUSLY.--_n._ DISADVANT[=A]'GEOUSNESS.

DISADVENTUROUS, dis-ad-ven't[=u]r-us, _adj._ unfortunate.--_ns._
DISADVEN'TURE, DISAVEN'TURE (_Spens._), a mishap.--_adj._ DISAVEN'TROUS
(_Spens._), unfortunate.

DISAFFECT, dis-af-fekt', _v.t._ to take away the affection of: to make
discontented or unfriendly.--_pa.p._ and _adj._ DISAFFECT'ED, ill-disposed,
disloyal.--_adv._ DISAFFECT'EDLY.--_ns._ DISAFFECT'EDNESS, DISAFFEC'TION,
state of being disaffected: want of affection or friendliness: disloyalty:
hostility: ill-will.--_adj._ DISAFFEC'TIONATE.

DISAFFIRM, dis-af-f[.e]rm', _v.t._ to deny (what has been affirmed): to
contradict.--_ns._ DISAFFIRM'ANCE, DISAFFIRMA'TION.

DISAFFOREST, dis-af-for'est, _v.t._ to deprive of the privilege of forest
laws: to bring into the condition of common land.--_ns._
DISAFFOREST[=A]'TION, DISAFFOR'ESTMENT (see DISFOREST). [L. _dis_, neg.,
and Low L. _afforest[=a]re_, to make into a forest. See FOREST.]

DISAGGREGATE, dis-ag'greg-[=a]t, _v.t._ to separate into component
parts.--_n._ DISAGGREG[=A]'TION.

DISAGREE, dis-a-gr[=e]', _v.i._ to differ or be at variance: to dissent: to
quarrel: to prove unsuitable or a source of annoyance, as of food
disagreeing with the stomach.--_adj._ DISAGREE'ABLE, not agreeable:
unpleasant: offensive.--_ns._ DISAGREE'ABLENESS, DISAGREEABIL'ITY.--_n.pl._
DISAGREE'ABLES, annoyances.--_adv._ DISAGREE'ABLY.--_n._ DISAGREE'MENT,
want of agreement: difference: unsuitableness: dispute.

DISALLOW, dis-al-low', _v.t._ not to allow: to refuse permission to: to
deny the authority of: to reject.--_adj._ DISALLOW'ABLE.--_n._
DISALLOW'ANCE.

DISALLY, dis-al-l[=i]', _v.t._ to break the alliance of: (_Milt._) to
separate, sunder.

DISANCHOR, dis-angk'ur, _v.t._ to free from the anchor.--_v.i._ to weigh
anchor.

DISANIMATE, dis-an'i-m[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of spirit or animation:
(_Shak._) to deject.

DISANNEX, dis-a-neks', _v.t._ to disjoin.

DISANNUL, dis-an-nul', _v.t._ to annul completely.--_ns._ DISANNUL'LER;
DISANNUL'MENT, DISANNUL'LING.

DISANOINT, dis-a-noint', _v.t._ to undo the anointing or consecration of.

DISAPPARAL, dis-ap-par'el, _v.t._ to disrobe.

DISAPPEAR, dis-ap-p[=e]r', _v.i._ to vanish from sight.--_n._
DISAPPEAR'ANCE, a ceasing to appear: removal from sight, flight, secret
withdrawal.

DISAPPOINT, dis-ap-point', _v.t._ to frustrate of what is appointed: to
deprive one of what he expected.--_p.adjs._ DISAPPOINT'ED, balked:
frustrated: (_Shak._) unprepared or ill-prepared; DISAPPOINT'ING, causing
disappointment.--_n._ DISAPPOINT'MENT, the defeat of one's hopes:
frustration: the vexation accompanying failure. [O. Fr.
_desapointer_--_des_ = L. _dis_, away, and _apointer_, to appoint. See
APPOINT.]

DISAPPROBATION, dis-ap-prob-[=a]'shun, _n._ censure: dislike.--_adjs._
DISAP'PROB[=A]TIVE, DISAP'PROB[=A]TRY.

DISAPPROPRIATE, dis-ap-pr[=o]'pri-[=a]t, _v.t._ to take away from that to
which anything has been appropriated.--_adj._ deprived of appropriation.

DISAPPROVE, dis-a-pr[=oo]v', _v.t._ to give an unfavourable opinion of, to
regard as bad or blameworthy (usually followed with _of_): to reject.--_n._
DISAPPROV'AL.--_adv._ DISAPPROV'INGLY.

DISARM, diz-ärm', _v.t._ to deprive of arms: to render defenceless: to
quell: to deprive of the power to hurt: to reduce to a peace
footing.--_v.i._ to disband troops, reduce national armaments to a peace
footing.--_n._ DISARM'AMENT. [O. Fr. _desarmer_, _des_--L. _dis-_, neg.,
_armer_, to arm.]

DISARRANGE, dis-ar-r[=a]nj', _v.t._ to undo the arrangement of: to
disorder: to derange.--_n._ DISARRANGE'MENT.

DISARRAY, dis-ar-r[=a]', _v.t._ to break the array of: to throw into
disorder: to strip of array or dress.--_n._ want of array or order:
undress. [O. Fr. _desarroi_, _des_--L. _dis_, away, _arroi_. See ARRAY.]

DISARTICULATE, dis-ar-tik'[=u]l-[=a]t, _v.t._ to separate the joints
of.--_n._ DISARTICUL[=A]'TION.

DISASSOCIATE, dis-as-s[=o]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to disconnect things
associated: to dissociate.--_n._ DISASSOCI[=A]'TION.

DISASTER, diz-as't[.e]r, _n._ an adverse or unfortunate event: a great and
sudden misfortune: calamity.--_adj._ DISAS'TROUS, calamitous, ruinous:
gloomy, foreboding disaster.--_adv._ DISAS'TROUSLY. [O. Fr. _desastre_,
_des_--L. _dis_, with evil sense, _astre_--L. _astrum_, a star, destiny.]

DISATTACH, dis-a-tach', _v.t._ to undo what is attached.--_n._
DISATTACH'MENT.

DISATTIRE, dis-at-t[=i]r', _v.t._ to divest of attire or dress: (_Spens._)
to undress.

DISATTUNE, dis-at-t[=u]n', _v.t._ to put out of harmony.

DISAUTHORISE, dis-aw'thor-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of authority.

DISAVENTURE (_Spens._) = disadventure.

DISAVOUCH, dis-a-vowch', _v.t._ to disavow.

DISAVOW, dis-a-vow', _v.t._ to disclaim knowledge of, sanction of, or
connection with: to disown: to deny.--_n._ DISAVOW'AL. [O. Fr. _desavouer_,
_des_--L. _dis_, away, _avouer_, to avow.]

DISBAND, dis-band', _v.t._ to break up a band: to disperse, esp. of
troops.--_v.i._ to break up.--_n._ DISBAND'MENT. [O. Fr. _desbander_,
_des_--L. _dis_, neg., _bander_.]

DISBAR, dis-bär', _v.t._ to expel a barrister from the bar.

DISBARK, dis-bärk', _v.t._ to land from a ship: to disembark. [O. Fr.
_desbarquer_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _barque_, bark.]

DISBARK, dis-bärk', _v.t._ to strip of bark, to bark.

DISBELIEVE, dis-be-l[=e]v', _v.t._ to refuse belief or credit to: to deny
the truth of, esp. of religious dogmas.--_ns._ DISBELIEF'; DISBELIEV'ER.

DISBENCH, dis-bensh', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to drive from a bench or seat: to
deprive of the privilege of a bencher (e.g. in the Inns of Court).

DISBEND, dis-bend', _v.t._ to unbend.

DISBLOOM, dis-bl[=oo]m', _v.t._ to deprive of bloom or blossoms.

DISBODIED, dis-bod'id, _adj._ disembodied.

DISBOSOM, dis-booz'um, _v.t._ to make known, reveal.

DISBOWEL, dis-bow'el, _v.t._ (_fig._) to disembowel:--_pr.p._
disbow'elling; _pa.p._ disbow'elled.

DISBRANCH, dis-bransh', _v.t._ to break off, as a branch from a tree: to
sever.

DISBUD, dis-bud', _v.t._ to deprive of buds or shoots.

DISBURDEN, dis-bur'dn, DISBURTHEN, dis-bur'_th_n, _v.t._ to unburden or rid
of a burden: to free.

DISBURSE, dis-burs', _v.t._ to pay out.--_n._ DISBURSE'MENT, a paying out:
that which is paid out. [O. Fr. _desbourser_, _des_--L. _dis_, apart, and
_bourse_, a purse.]

DISC, DISK, disk, _n._ the face of a round plate, any flat, round object:
the face of a celestial body: (_bot._) the flat surface of an organ, as a
leaf, any flat, round growth.--_adjs._ DISC'AL; DISCIF'EROUS;
DISCIFL[=O]'RAL; DIS'CIFORM. [L. _discus_--Gr. _diskos_, a round plate, a
quoit--_dikein_, to cast. See DESK, DISH.]

DISCAGE, dis-k[=a]j', _v.t._ to take out of a cage.

DISCALCED, dis-kalsd', _adj._ without shoes, barefooted, a term for a
branch of the Carmelite order. [L. _discalce[=a]tus_--_dis_, neg., and
_calce[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to shoe, _calceus_, a shoe--_calx_, the heel.]

DISCANDY, dis-kan'di, _v.i._ (_Shak._) to dissolve or melt from a state of
being candied.

DISCANT, dis'kant. Same as DESCANT.

DISCAPACITATE, dis-ka-pas'i-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to incapacitate.

DISCARD, dis-kärd, _v.t._ and _v.i._ to throw away, as not needed or not
allowed by the game, said of cards: in whist, to throw down a (useless)
card of another suit when one cannot follow suit and cannot or will not
trump: to cast off: to discharge: to reject.--_n._ the act of discarding:
the card or cards thrown out of the hand.--_n._ DISCARD'MENT.

DISCASE, dis-k[=a]s', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to remove a case or covering from,
to undress.

DISCEPT, dis-ept', _v.i._ (_Browning_) to dispute, debate.--_n._
DISCEPT[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DISCEPT[=A]'TIOUS.--_n._ DISCEPT[=A]'TOR.--_adj._
DISCEPTAT[=O]'RIAL. [L. _disceptare_, _-[=a]tum_, to contend.]

DISCERN, diz-[.e]rn', _v.t._ to distinguish clearly by the eye or
understanding: to judge (sometimes with _between_).--_n._
DISCERN'ER.--_adj._ DISCERN'IBLE.--_adv._ DISCERN'IBLY.--_p.adj._
DISCERN'ING, discriminating, acute.--_n._ DISCERN'MENT, power or faculty of
discriminating: judgment: acuteness. [L. _discernUere_--_dis_, thoroughly,
and _cern[)e]re_, to sift, perceive.]

DISCERP, di-serp', _v.t._ to separate.--_n._ DISCERPIBIL'ITY, capability of
being disunited.--_adjs._ DISCERP'IBLE, DISCERP'TIBLE.--_n._
DISCERP'TION.--_adj._ DISCERP'TIVE. [L. _discerp[)e]re_, to tear in
pieces.]

DISCHARGE, dis-chärj', _v.t._ to free from a load or charge: to unload or
remove the cargo: to set free: to acquit: to dismiss: to fire, as a gun: to
let out or emit: to perform, as duties: to pay, as an account.--_n._ act of
discharging: unloading: acquittance: dismissal: a flowing out: payment:
performance: that which is discharged.--_n._ DISCHARG'ER. [O. Fr.
_descharger_--_des_, apart, and _charger_, to load.]

DISCHARITY, dis-char'i-ti, _n._ want of charity.

DISCHARM, dis-chärm, _v.t._ to remove the charm, or power of a charm, from.

DISCHURCH, dis-church', _v.t._ to deprive of church rank or privileges.

DISCIDE, dis-s[=i]d', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to cut asunder, to divide. [L.
_dis_, asunder, and _coed[)e]re_, to cut.]

DISCINCT, dis-singkt', _adj._ ungirded. [L. _discing[)e]re_, _-cinctum_, to
ungird.]

DISCIPLE, dis-[=i]'pl, _n._ one who professes to receive instruction from
another: one who follows or believes in the doctrine of another: a
follower, esp. one of the twelve disciples of Christ.--_v.t._ (_Spens._) to
teach.--_n._ DISC[=I]'PLESHIP.--DISCIPLES OF CHRIST, a denomination of
American Baptists, also known as _Campbellites_. [Fr.,--L. _discipulus_,
from _disc[)e]re_, to learn; akin to _doc[=e]re_, to teach.]

DISCIPLINE, dis'i-plin, _n._ instruction: training, or mode of life in
accordance with rules: subjection to control: order: severe training:
mortification: punishment: an instrument of penance or punishment.--_v.t._
to subject to discipline: to train: to educate: to bring under control: to
chastise.--_adjs._ DIS'CIPLINABLE; DIS'CIPLINAL.--_ns._ DIS'CIPLINANT, one
who subjects himself to a certain discipline, esp. one of an order of
Spanish flagellants; DISCIPLIN[=A]'RIAN, one who enforces strict
discipline; DISCIPLIN[=A]'RIUM, a scourge for penitential flogging.--_adj._
DIS'CIPLINARY, of the nature of discipline--_n._ DIS'CIPLINER, one who
disciplines.--FIRST, and SECOND, BOOK OF DISCIPLINE, two documents (1560
and 1578) embodying the constitution and order of procedure of the Church
of Scotland from the period of the Reformation. [L. _disciplina_, from
_discipulus_.]

DISCISSION, di-sish'un, _n._ an incision into a tumour or cataract. [See
DISCIDE.]

DISCLAIM, dis-kl[=a]m', _v.t._ to renounce all claim to: to refuse to
acknowledge or be responsible for: to reject.--_v.i._ to give up all claim
(with _in_).--_ns._ DISCLAIM'ER, a denial, disavowal, or renunciation;
DISCLAM[=A]'TION, a disavowal. [O. Fr. _disclaimer_--L. _dis_, apart,
_clam[=a]re_, to cry out.]

DISCLOSE, dis-kl[=o]z', _v.t._ to unclose: to open: to lay open: to bring
to light: to reveal.--_n._ DISCL[=O]'SURE, act of disclosing: a bringing to
light or revealing: that which is disclosed or revealed. [O. Fr.
_desclos_--L. _disclud[=e]re_--_dis_, apart, _claud[)e]re_, to shut,
close.]

DISCOBOLUS, dis-kob'o-lus, _n._ 'the disc-thrower,' the name of several
famous statues of athletes. [L.,--Gr. _diskos_, a quoit, _ballein_, to
throw.]

DISCOID, -AL, dis'koid, -al, _adj._ having the form of a disc. [Gr.
_diskos_, and _eidos_, form.]

DISCOLOUR, dis-kul'ur, _v.t._ to take away colour from: to change or to
spoil the natural colour of: to alter the appearance of: to mark with other
colours, to stain: to dirty, disfigure.--_n._ DISCOLOR[=A]'TION, act of
discolouring: state of being discoloured: stain.--_p.adj._ DISCOL'OURED,
stained, &c.: (_Spens._) many-coloured. [O. Fr. _descolorer_--L. _dis_,
apart, and _color[=a]re_--_color_; colour.]

DISCOMFIT, dis-kum'fit, _v.t._ to disconcert, to balk: to defeat or
rout;--_pr.p._ discom'fiting; _pa.p._ discom'fited.--_n._ (_Milt._)
defeat.--_n._ DISCOM'FITURE. [O. Fr. _desconfit_, pa.p. of _desconfire_--L.
_dis_, neg., _confic[)e]re_, to prepare--_con_, inten., _fac[)e]re_, to
make.]

DISCOMFORT, dis-kum'furt, _n._ want of comfort: uneasiness: pain.--_v.t._
to deprive of comfort: to make uneasy: to pain: to grieve.--_adj._
DISCOM'FORTABLE, causing discomfort: uncomfortable. [O. Fr.
_desconforter_--_des_, apart, _conforter_, to comfort.]

DISCOMMEND, dis-kom-end', _v.t._ to blame.--_adj._ DISCOMMEND'ABLE.--_ns._
DISCOMMEND'ABLENESS, DISCOMMEND[=A]'TION.

DISCOMMISSION, dis-kom-ish'un, _v.t._ (_Milt._) to deprive of a commission.

DISCOMMODE, dis-kom-[=o]d', _v.t._ to incommode.--_adj._
DISCOMM[=O]'DIOUS.--_adv._ DISCOMM[=O]'DIOUSLY.--_n._ DISCOMMOD'ITY,
inconvenience.

DISCOMMON, dis-kom'un, _v.t._ to deprive of the right of common, or, at
Oxford and Cambridge, of dealing with undergraduates.

DISCOMMUNITY, dis-kom-[=u]n'i-ti, _n._ want of community.

DISCOMPOSE, dis-kom-p[=o]z', _v.t._ to deprive of composure: to disarrange,
to disorder: to disturb: to agitate.--_n._ DISCOMP[=O]'SURE.

DISCONCERT, dis-kon-s[.e]rt', _v.t._ to deprive of harmony or agreement: to
disturb: to frustrate: to defeat: to put out of countenance.--_n._
DISCON'CERT, disunion; DISCONCER'TION, confusion; DISCONCERT'MENT. [O. Fr.
_disconcerter_--_des_ = L. _dis_, apart, and _concerter_, to concert.]

DISCONFORMABLE, dis-kon-form'a-bl, _adj._ not conformable.--_n._
DISCONFORM'ITY, want of conformity: inconsistency.

DISCONGRUITY, dis-kon-gr[=oo]'i-ti, _n._ incongruity.

DISCONNECT, dis-kon-ekt', _v.t._ to separate or disjoin (with
_from_).--_p.adj._ DISCONNECT'ED, separated: loosely united, as of a
discourse.--_adv._ DISCONNECT'EDLY.--_n._ DISCONNEC'TION.

DISCONSENT, dis-kon-sent', _v.i._ to differ, dissent.

DISCONSOLATE, dis-kon's[=o]-l[=a]t, _adj._ without consolation or comfort:
hopeless: sad.--_adv._ DISCON'SOLATELY.--_ns._ DISCON'SOLATENESS,
DISCONSOL[=A]'TION. [L. _dis_, neg., and _consol[=a]ri_, _consol[=a]tus_,
to console.]

DISCONTENT, dis-kon-tent', _adj._ not content: dissatisfied: ill-humoured:
peevish.--_n._ want of content: dissatisfaction: ill-humour.--_v.t._ to
deprive of content: to stir up to ill-will.--_adj._ DISCONTENT'ED,
dissatisfied.--_adv._ DISCONTENT'EDLY.--_n._ DISCONTENT'EDNESS.--_adj._
DISCONTENT'FUL.--_p.adj._ DISCONTENT'ING, not contenting or satisfying:
(_Shak._) discontented.--_n._ DISCONTENT'MENT, the opposite of contentment:
ill-humour.

DISCONTINUE, dis-kon-tin'[=u], _v.t._ to cease to continue: to put an end
to: to leave off: to stop.--_v.i._ to cease: to be separated from.--_ns._
DISCONTIN'UANCE, DISCONTINU[=A]'TION, a breaking off or ceasing;
DISCONTIN[=U]'ITY.--_adj._ DISCONTIN'UOUS, not continuous: broken off:
separated: interrupted by intervening spaces.--_adv._ DISCONTIN'UOUSLY. [O.
Fr. _discontinuer_--L. _dis_, neg., and _continu[=a]re_, to continue.]

DISCOPHORA, dis-kof'[=o]-ra, _n.pl._ the discoidal
hydrozoans--jelly-fishes, &c.--_n._ DISCOPH'ORAN, one of the
foregoing.--_adj._ DISCOPH'OROUS, having a gelatinous bell or disc. [Gr.]

DISCORD, dis'kord, _n._ opposite of _concord_: disagreement, strife:
difference or contrariety of qualities: a combination of inharmonious
sounds: uproarious noise.--_v.i._ DISCORD', to disagree.--_ns._
DISCORD'ANCE, DISCORD'ANCY.--_adj._ DISCORD'ANT, without concord or
agreement: inconsistent: contradictory: harsh: jarring.--_adv._
DISCORD'ANTLY.--_adj._ DISCORD'FUL (_Spens._).--APPLE OF DISCORD (see
APPLE). [O. Fr. _descord_--L. _discordia_--_dis_, neg., and _cor_,
_cordis_, the heart.]

DISCORPORATE, dis-kor'p[=o]-r[=a]t, _adj._ disembodied.

DISCOUNSEL, dis-kown'sel, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to dissuade. [O. Fr.
_desconseillier_--_des_, apart, and _conseillier_, to counsel.]

DISCOUNT, dis'kownt, _n._ a sum taken from the reckoning: a sum returned to
the payer of an account: a deduction made for interest in advancing money
on a bill.--_v.t._ DISCOUNT', to allow discount: to advance money on,
deducting discount: to put a reduced value on, as in an extravagant
statement or fabulous story.--_v.i._ to practise discounting.--_adj._
DISCOUNT'ABLE.--_ns._ DIS'COUNT-BROK'ER, one who cashes notes or bills of
exchange at a discount; DISCOUNT'ER.--AT A DISCOUNT, below par: not sought
after: superfluous: depreciated in value. [O. Fr. _descompter_, _des_--L.
_dis_, away, _compter_, to count.]

DISCOUNTENANCE, dis-kown'ten-ans, _v.t._ (_obs._) to put out of
countenance: to abash: to refuse countenance or support to: to
discourage.--_n._ cold treatment: disapprobation. [O. Fr. _descontenancer_,
_des-_, neg., _contenance_, countenance.]

DISCOURAGE, dis-kur'[=a]j, _v.t._ to take away the courage of: to
dishearten: to seek to check by showing disfavour to.--_n._
DISCOUR'AGEMENT, act of discouraging: that which discourages:
dejection.--_p.adj._ DISCOUR'AGING, disheartening, depressing.--_adv._
DISCOUR'AGINGLY. [O. Fr. _descourager_. See COURAGE.]

DISCOURSE, dis-k[=o]rs', _n._ speech or language generally: conversation:
the reasoning faculty: a treatise: a sermon.--_v.i._ to talk or converse:
to reason: to treat formally.--_v.t._ to utter or give forth.--_n._
DISCOURS'ER (_Shak._).--_adj._ DISCOURS'IVE. [Fr. _discours_--L.
_discursus_--_dis_, away, _curr[)e]re_, to run.]

DISCOURTEOUS, dis-kurt'yus, _adj._ wanting in good manners; uncivil:
rude.--_adv._ DISCOURT'EOUSLY.--_ns._ DISCOURT'EOUSNESS, DISCOURT'ESY. [O.
Fr. _descourtois_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _cortois_, courteous.]

DISCOUS, disk'us, _adj._ disc-like: broad: flat.

DISCOVER, dis-kuv'[.e]r, _v.t._ to uncover: to lay open or expose: to
exhibit: to make known: to find out: to espy.--_adj._ DISCOVERABLE.--_ns._
DISCOV'ERER; DISCOV'ERY, the act of finding out: the thing discovered. [O.
Fr. _descouvrir_, _des_--L. _dis_, away, _couvrir_, to cover.]

DISCOVERT, dis-kuv'ert, _adj._ (_law_) not under the bonds of matrimony,
either of a spinster or widow.--_n._ DISCOV'ERTURE. [Lit. uncovered,
unprotected; O. Fr. _descovert_. See DISCOVER.]

DISCREDIT, dis-kred'it, _n._ want of credit: bad credit: ill-repute:
disgrace.--_v.t._ to refuse credit to, or belief in: to deprive of
credibility: to deprive of credit: to disgrace.--_adj._ DISCRED'ITABLE, not
creditable: disgraceful.--_adv._ DISCRED'ITABLY.

DISCREET, dis-kr[=e]t', _adj._ having discernment: wary: circumspect:
prudent.--_adv._ DISCREETLY.--_n._ DISCREET'NESS. [O. Fr. _discret_--L.
_discr[=e]tus_--_discern[)e]re_, to separate, to perceive.]

DISCREPANCY, dis-krep'an-si, or dis'krep-an-si, _n._ disagreement, variance
of facts or sentiments--(_obs._) DISCREP'ANCE.--_adj._ DISCREP'ANT,
contrary, disagreeing. [Through Fr. from L. _discrepan(t)s_,
different--_dis_, asunder, and _crepans_, pr.p. of _crep[=a]re_, to sound.]

DISCRETE, dis-kr[=e]t', _adj._ separate: consisting of distinct parts:
referring to distinct objects--opposite of _concrete_.--_adv._
DISCRETE'LY.--_n._ DISCRETE'NESS.--_adj._ DISCRET'IVE, separating:
disjunctive.--_adv._ DISCRET'IVELY. [A doublet of _discreet_.]

DISCRETION, dis-kresh'un, _n._ quality of being discreet: prudence: liberty
to act at pleasure.--_adjs._ DISCRE'TIONAL, DISCRE'TIONARY, left to
discretion: unrestricted,--_advs._ DISCRE'TIONALLY, DISCRE'TIONARILY.--AGE,
YEARS, OF DISCRETION, mature years; AT DISCRETION, according to one's own
judgment; BE AT ONE'S DISCRETION, to be completely under another person's
power or control; SURRENDER AT DISCRETION, to surrender unconditionally,
that is, to another's discretion. [Through Fr. from L. _discretion-em_,
_discern[)e]re_, _-cr[=e]tum_.]

DISCRIMINATE, dis-krim'i-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to note the difference: to
distinguish: to select from others.--_v.i._ to make a difference or
distinction: to distinguish.--_adv._ DISCRIM'INATELY.--_p.adj._
DISCRIM'INATING, noting distinctions: gifted with judgment and
penetration.--_adv._ DISCRIM'INATINGLY.--_n._ DISCRIMIN[=A]'TION, act or
quality of distinguishing: acuteness: discernment, judgment.--_adj._
DISCRIM'INATIVE, that marks a difference: characteristic: observing
distinctions.--_adv._ DISCRIM'INATIVELY.--_n._ DISCRIM'IN[=A]TOR. [L.
_discrimin[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_discrimen_, _discriminis_, that which
separates, _discern[)e]re_, discern.]

DISCROWN, dis-krown', _v.t._ to deprive of a crown.

DISCULPATE, dis-kul'p[=a]t, _v.t._ to free from blame.

DISCUMBER, dis-kum'b[.e]r, _v.t._ to disencumber.

DISCURE, dis-k[=u]r', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to discover.

DISCURSIVE, dis-kur'siv, _adj._ running from one thing to another: roving,
desultory: proceeding regularly from premises to conclusion: intellectual,
rational.--_ns._ DISCUR'SION, desultory talk: act of reasoning;
DISCUR'SIST, a disputer.--_adv._ DISCUR'SIVELY.--_n._
DISCUR'SIVENESS.--_adj._ DISCUR'SORY, discursive.--_n._ DISCUR'SUS,
argument. [See DISCOURSE.]

DISCUS, dis'kus, _n._ a quoit, disc. [L.,--Gr. _diskos_.]

DISCUSS, dis-kus', _v.t._ to examine in detail, or by disputation: to
debate: to sift: (_coll._) to consume, as a bottle of wine.--_adj._
DISCUSS'ABLE.--_n._ DISCUS'SION, debate: (_surg._) dispersion of a
tumour.--_adjs._ DISCUSS'IVE, DISC[=U]'TIENT, able or tending to discuss or
disperse tumours.--_n._ DISC[=U]'TIENT, a medicine with this property. [L.
_discut[)e]re_, _discussum_--_dis_, asunder, _quat[)e]re_, to shake.]

DISDAIN, dis-d[=a]n', _v.t._ to think unworthy: to reject as unsuitable: to
scorn.--_n._ a feeling of scorn or aversion: haughtiness.--_adjs._
DISDAINED' (_Shak._), disdainful; DISDAIN'FUL.--_adv._ DISDAIN'FULLY.--_n._
DISDAIN'FULNESS. [O. Fr. _desdaigner_--L. _dedign[=a]ri_, _de_, _dis_,
neg., and _dignus_, worthy.]

DISEASE, diz-[=e]z', _n._ a disorder or want of health in mind or body:
ailment: cause of pain.--_v.t._ (_Spens._) to make uneasy.--_p.adj._
DISEASED', affected with disease.--_n._ DISEAS'EDNESS.--_adj._ DISEASE'FUL.
[O. Fr. _desaise_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _aise_, ease.]

DISEDGE, dis-ej', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to deprive of the edge: to blunt; to
dull.

DISEDIFY, dis-ed'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to do the reverse of edifying: to
scandalise.--_n._ DISEDIFIC[=A]'TION.

DISEMBARK, dis-em-bärk', _v.t._ to land persons, troops, &c.: to take out
of a ship.--_v.i._ to quit a ship: to land.--_ns._ DISEMBARK[=A]'TION,
DISEMBARK'MENT. [O. Fr. _desembarquer_, _des-_--L. _dis_, neg.,
_embarquer_. See EMBARK.]

DISEMBARRASS, dis-em-bär'as, _v.t._ to free from embarrassment or
perplexity.--_n._ DISEMBARR'ASSMENT. [O. Fr. _disembarrasser_, _des_--L.
_dis_, neg., _embarrasser_. See EMBARRASS.]

DISEMBELLISH, dis-em-bel'ish, _v.t._ to deprive of embellishment.

DISEMBITTER, dis-em-bit'[.e]r, _v.t._ to free from bitterness.

DISEMBODY, dis-em-bod'i, _v.t._ to take away from or out of the body (esp.
of disembodied spirits): to discharge from military service or array.--_n._
DISEMBOD'IMENT.

DISEMBOGUE, dis-em-b[=o]g', _v.t._ and _v.i._ to discharge at the mouth, as
a stream.--_n._ DISEMBOGUE'MENT. [Sp. _desembocar_, _des_--L. _dis_,
asunder, _embocar_, to enter the mouth, _em-_--L. _im_, _in_, into,
_boca_--L. _bucca_, a cheek, the mouth.]

DISEMBOSOM, dis-em-b[=oo]z'um, _v.t._ to separate from the bosom: to
disburden one's self of a secret.

DISEMBOWEL, dis-em-bow'el, _v.t._ to take out the bowels of: to tear out
the inside of a thing.--_n._ DISEMBOW'ELMENT.

DISEMBRANGLE, dis-em-brang'gl, _v.t._ to free from dispute.

DISEMBROIL, dis-em-broil', _v.t._ to free from broil or confusion.

DISEMBURDEN, dis-em-bur'dn, _v.t._ to disburden.

DISEMPLOY, dis-em-ploi', _v.t._ to relieve of employment.--_adj._
DISEMPLOYED'.

DISENABLE, dis-en-[=a]'bl, _v.t._ to make unable: to disable: (_obs._) to
deprive of power.

DISENCHAIN, dis-en-ch[=a]n', _v.t._ to free from restraint.

DISENCHANT, dis-en-chant', _v.t._ to free from enchantment, to
disillusionise.--_ns._ DISENCHANT'ER:--_fem._ DISENCHANT'RESS;
DISENCHANT'MENT. [O. Fr. _desenchanter_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg.,
_enchanter_, to enchant.]

DISENCLOSE, dis-en-kl[=o]z', _v.t._ to free from the condition of being
enclosed: to dispark.--Also DISINCLOSE.

DISENCUMBER, dis-en-kum'b[.e]r, _v.t._ to free from encumbrance: to
disburden.--_n._ DISENCUM'BRANCE.

DISENDOW, dis-en-dow', _v.t._ to take away the endowments (esp. of an
established church).--_adj._ DISENDOWED'.--_n._ DISENDOW'MENT.

DISENFRANCHISE, dis-en-fran'chiz, _v.t._ (_rare_) to disfranchise: to
deprive of suffrage.--_n._ DISENFRAN'CHISEMENT.

DISENGAGE, dis-en-g[=a]j', _v.t._ to separate or free from being engaged:
to separate: to set free: to release.--_ns._ DISENGAG'EDNESS;
DISENGAGE'MENT. [O. Fr. _desengager_, _des-_--L. _dis_, neg., _engager_, to
engage.]

DISENNOBLE, dis-en-n[=o]'bl, _v.t._ to deprive of title, or of what
ennobles: to degrade.

DISENROL, dis-en-r[=o]l', _v.t._ to remove from a roll.

DISENSHROUD, dis-en-shrowd', _v.t._ to divest of a shroud, to unveil.

DISENSLAVE, dis-en-sl[=a]v', _v.t._ to free from bondage.

DISENTAIL, dis-en-t[=a]l', _v.t._ to break the entail of (an estate): to
divest.--_n._ the act of disentailing.

DISENTANGLE, dis-en-tang'gl, _v.t._ to free from entanglement or disorder:
to unravel: to disengage or set free.--_n._ DISENTANG'LEMENT.

DISENTHRAL, DISENTHRALL, dis-en-thrawl', _v.t._ to free from
enthralment.--_n._ DISENTHRAL'MENT.

DISENTHRONE, dis-en-thr[=o]n', _v.t._ (_Milt._) to dethrone.

DISENTITLE, dis-en-t[=i]'tl, _v.t._ to deprive of title.

DISENTOMB, dis-en-t[=oo]m', _v.t._ to take out from a tomb.

DISENTRAIL, dis-en'tr[=a]l, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to disembowel.

DISENTRANCE, dis-en-trans', _v.t._ to awaken from a trance or deep sleep:
to arouse from a reverie.--_n._ DISENTRANCE'MENT.

DISENTWINE, dis-en-tw[=i]n', _v.t._ to untwine.

DISENVELOP, dis-en-vel'op, _v.t._ to free from that in which a thing is
enveloped, to unfold.

DISENVIRON, dis-en-v[=i]'ron, _v.t._ to deprive of its environment.

DISESPOUSE, dis-es-powz', _v.t._ (_Milt._) to separate after espousal or
betrothment.

DISESTABLISH, dis-es-tab'lish, _v.t._ to take away what has been
established or settled, esp. of the standing of church as established by
law.--_n._ DISESTAB'LISHMENT.

DISESTEEM, dis-es-t[=e]m', _n._ want of esteem: disregard.--_v.t._ to
disapprove: to dislike.--_n._ DISESTIM[=A]'TION.

DISFAME, dis-f[=a]m', _n._ evil reputation.

DISFAVOUR, dis-f[=a]'vur, _n._ want of favour: displeasure:
dislike.--_v.t._ to withhold favour from: to disapprove: to oppose.--_n._
DISF[=A]'VOURER.

DISFEATURE, dis-f[=e]'t[=u]r, _v.t._ to deprive of a feature: to deface.

DISFELLOWSHIP, dis-fel'[=o]-ship, _n._ want of, or exclusion from,
fellowship.--_v.t._ to excommunicate.

DISFIGURE, dis-fig'[=u]r, _v.t._ to spoil the figure of: to change to a
worse form: to spoil the beauty of: to deform.--_ns._ DISFIG'UREMENT,
DISFIGUR[=A]'TION. [O. Fr. _desfigurer_--L. _dis_, neg., _figur[=a]re_, to
figure.]

DISFLESH, dis-flesh', _v.t._ to deprive of flesh, to disembody.

DISFOREST, dis-for'est, _v.t._ to strip of trees: to disafforest.

DISFORM, dis-form', _v.t._ to alter the form of.

DISFRANCHISE, dis-fran'chiz, _v.t._ to deprive of a franchise, or of rights
and privileges, esp. that of voting for a M.P.--_n._ DISFRAN'CHISEMENT.

DISFROCK, dis-frok', _v.t._ to unfrock, deprive of clerical garb.

DISFURNISH, dis-fur'nish, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to strip, render
destitute.--_n._ DISFUR'NISHMENT.

DISGARNISH, dis-gar'nish, _v.t._ to despoil.

DISGARRISON, dis-gar'i-sn, _v.t._ to deprive of a garrison.

DISGAVEL, dis-gav'el, _v.t._ to relieve from the tenure of gavelkind.

DISGLORIFY, dis-gl[=o]'ri-f[=i], _v.t._ (_Milt._) to deprive of glory.

DISGODDED, dis-god'ed, _adj._ deprived of divinity.

DISGORGE, dis-gorj', _v.t._ to discharge from the throat: to vomit: to
throw out with violence: to give up what has been seized.--_n._
DISGORGE'MENT. [O. Fr. _desgorger_, _des_, away, _gorge_, throat. See
GORGE.]

DISGOSPEL, dis-gos'pel, _v.i._ to act in a manner not becoming the gospel.

DISGOWN, dis-gown', _v.t._ or _v.i._ to deprive of his gown: to divest
one's self of a clerical gown, to renounce orders.

DISGRACE, dis-gr[=a]s', _n._ state of being out of grace or favour, or of
being dishonoured: cause of shame: dishonour.--_v.t._ to put out of favour:
to bring disgrace or shame upon.--_adj._ DISGRACE'FUL, bringing disgrace:
causing shame: dishonourable.--_adv._ DISGRACE'FULLY.--_ns._
DISGRACE'FULNESS; DISGR[=A]'CER.--_adj._ DISGR[=A]'CIOUS (_Shak._),
ungracious, unpleasing. [O. Fr.,--L. _dis_, neg., and _gratia_, favour,
grace.]

DISGRADE, dis-gr[=a]d', _v.t._ to deprive of any rank or status.--_n._
DISGRAD[=A]'TION.

DISGREGATION, dis-gr[=e]-g[=a]'shun, _n._ separation, esp. of molecules.

DISGRUNTLE, dis-grun'tl, _v.t._ (_prov._) to disappoint, disgust.--_adj._
DISGRUN'TLED, rendered sulky. [_Dis-_ and _gruntle_, to grunt, to be
sulky.]

DISGUISE, dis-g[=i]z', _v.t._ to change the guise or appearance of: to
conceal by a dress intended to deceive, or by a counterfeit manner and
appearance: to intoxicate (usually 'disguised in liquor')--_n._ a dress
intended to conceal the wearer: a false appearance: change of behaviour in
intoxication.--_adv._ DISGUIS'EDLY.--_ns._ DISGUIS'EDNESS; DISGUISE'MENT;
DISGUIS'ER; DISGUIS'ING. [O. Fr. _desguiser_--_des_, neg., _guise_, manner,
guise.]

DISGUST, dis-gust', _n._ loathing: strong dislike.--_v.t._ to excite
disgust in: to offend the taste of: to displease.--_adv._
DISGUST'EDLY.--_adjs._ DISGUST'ING, DISGUST'FUL.--_adv._
DISGUST'INGLY.--_ns._ DISGUST'INGNESS, DISGUST'FULNESS. [O. Fr.
_desgouster_--_des_ (= L. _dis_), and _gouster_--L. _gust[=a]re_, to
taste.]

DISH, dish, _n._ a plate: a vessel in which food is served: the food in a
dish: a particular kind of food: the condition of having a dish shape,
concavity of form.--_v.t._ to put in a dish, for table: (_coll._) to
outwit, to defeat.--_ns._ DISH'-CLOUT, DISH'-CLOTH; DISH'-COV'ER, a cover
for a dish to keep it hot.--_adj._ DISH'-FACED; having a round, flat
face.--_ns._ DISH'FUL; DISH'ING, putting in a dish.--_adj._ hollow like a
dish.--_n._ DISH'-WA'TER, water in which dishes have been washed.--DISH UP,
to serve up, esp. figuratively of old materials cooked up anew. [A.S.
_disc_, a plate, a dish, a table--L. _discus_. Doublets, _disc_ and _desk_;
cf. Ger. _tisch_, a table.]

DISHABILITATE, dis-ha-bil'i-t[=a]t, _v.t._ to disqualify: to attaint.--_n._
DISHABILIT[=A]'TION.

DISHABILLE, dis-a-bil'. Same as DESHABILLE.

DISHABIT, dis-hab'it, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to drive from a habitation. [O. Fr.
_deshabiter_--L. _dis_, neg., _habit[=a]re_, to inhabit.]

DISHALLOW, dis-hal'[=o], _v.t._ to desecrate.

DISHARMONY, dis-har'mo-ni, _n._ lack of harmony: discord:
incongruity.--_adj._ DISHARM[=O]'NIOUS.--_adv._
DISHARM[=O]'NIOUSLY.--_v.t._ and _v.i._ DISHAR'MONISE, to put out of, or be
out of, harmony.

DISHEARTEN, dis-härt'n, _v.t._ to deprive of heart, courage, or spirits: to
discourage: to depress.--_adjs._ DISHEART'ENED; DISHEART'ENING.

DISHELM, dis-helm', _v.t._ to divest of a helmet.

DISHERIT, dis-her'it, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to disinherit.--_ns._ DISHER'ISON;
DISHER'ITOR. [O. Fr. _desheriter_--L. _dis_, neg., Late L. _heredit[=a]re_,
to inherit.]

DISHEVEL, di-shev'el, _v.t._ to disorder the hair: to cause the hair to
hang loose.--_v.i._ to spread in disorder:--_pr.p._ dishev'elling; _pa.p._
dishev'elled.--_n._ DISHEV'ELMENT. [O. Fr. _discheveler_--Low L.
_discapill[=a]re_, to tear out or disorder the hair--L. _dis_, in different
directions, _capillus_, the hair.]

DISHOME, dis-h[=o]m', _v.t._ to deprive of a home.

DISHONEST, diz-on'est, _adj._ not honest: wanting integrity: disposed to
cheat: insincere: (_Shak._) unchaste.--_adv._ DISHON'ESTLY.--_n._
DISHON'ESTY. [O. Fr. _deshonneste_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _honneste_--L.
_honestus_, honest.]

DISHONOUR, diz-on'ur, _n._ want of honour: disgrace: shame:
reproach.--_v.t._ to deprive of honour: to disgrace: to cause shame to: to
seduce: to degrade: to refuse the payment of, as a cheque.--_adjs._
DISHON'ORARY, causing dishonour; DISHON'OURABLE, having no sense of honour:
disgraceful.--_n._ DISHON'OURABLENESS.--_adv._ DISHON'OURABLY.--_n._
DISHON'OURER. [O. Fr. _deshonneur_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _honneur_--L.
_honor_, honour.]

DISHORN, dis-horn', _v.t._ to deprive of horns.

DISHORSE, dis-hors', _v.t._ to unhorse.

DISHUMOUR, dis-h[=u]'mur, _n._ ill-humour.

DISILLUDE, dis-il-l[=u]d', _v.t._ to free from illusion.--_n._
DISILL[=U]'SION, a freeing from illusion: state of being
disillusionised.--_v.t._ to free from illusion, disenchant.--_adj._
DISILL[=U]'SIONARY.--_v.t._ DISILL[=U]'SIONISE.--_n._
DISILL[=U]'SIONMENT.--_adj._ DISILL[=U]'SIVE.

DISILLIUMINATE, dis-il-l[=u]'mi-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to destroy the light of, to
darken.

DISIMAGINE, dis-i-maj'in, _v.t._ to banish from the imagination.

DISIMMURE, dis-im-m[=u]r', _v.t._ to release from imprisonment.

DISIMPASSIONED, dis-im-pash'und, _adj._ free from the influence of passion,
tranquil.

DISIMPRISON, dis-im-priz'n, _v.t._ to free from prison or restraint.--_n._
DISIMPRIS'ONMENT.

DISIMPROVE, dis-im-pr[=oo]v', _v.t._ and _v.i._ to render worse, to grow
worse.

DISINCARCERATE, dis-in-kär's[.e]r-[=a]t, _v.t._ to free from prison.--_n._
DISINCARCER[=A]'TION.

DISINCLINATION, dis-in-kli-n[=a]'shun, _n._ want of inclination:
unwillingness.--_v.t._ DISINCLINE', to turn away inclination from: to
excite the dislike or aversion of.--_adj._ DISINCLINED', not inclined:
averse.

DISINCLOSE. See DISENCLOSE.

DISINCORPORATE, dis-in-kor'po-r[=a]t, _v.t._ to deprive of corporate
rights.--_n._ DISINCORPOR[=A]'TION.

DISINDIVIDUALISE, dis-in-di-vid'[=u]-al-[=i]z, _v.t._ to deprive of
individuality.

DISINFECT, dis-in-fekt', _v.t._ to free from infection: to purify from
infectious germs.--_ns._ DISINFECT'ANT, anything that destroys the causes
of infection; DISINFEC'TION; DISINFECT'OR.

DISINGENUOUS, dis-in-jen'[=u]-us, _adj._ not ingenuous: not frank or open:
crafty.--_adv._ DISINGEN'UOUSLY.--_n._ DISINGEN'UOUSNESS.

DISINHERIT, dis-in-her'it, _v.t._ to cut off from hereditary rights: to
deprive of an inheritance.--_ns._ DISINHER'ISON, act of disinheriting;
DISINHER'ITANCE.

DISINHUME, dis-in-h[=u]m', _v.t._ to take out of the earth, to disinter.

DISINTEGRATE, dis-in'te-gr[=a]t, or diz-, _v.t._ to separate into integrant
parts: to break up.--_adjs._ DISIN'TEGRABLE, DISIN'TEGRATIVE.--_ns._
DISINTEGR[=A]'TION; DISIN'TEGRATOR, a machine for crushing or pulverising
oil-cake, mineral ores, &c.

DISINTER, dis-in-t[.e]r', _v.t._ to take out of a grave: to bring from
obscurity into view.--_n._ DISINTER'MENT.

DISINTERESTED, dis-in't[.e]r-est-ed, _adj._ not interested or influenced by
private feelings or considerations: impartial: unselfish, generous.--_adv._
DISIN'TERESTEDLY.--_n._ DISIN'TERESTEDNESS.--_adj._ DISIN'TERESTING
(_obs._), not interesting. [Corr. of _disinterest_ = _disinteress'd_, O.
Fr. _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _interessé_, interested in. See INTEREST.]

DISINTHRAL. Same as DISENTHRAL.

DISINTRICATE, dis-in'tri-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to free from intricacy.

DISINURE, dis-in-[=u]r', _v.t._ (_Milt._) to render unfamiliar.

DISINVEST, dis-in-vest', _v.t._ to divest.--_n._ DISINVEST'ITURE, the
action of disinvesting.

DISINVIGORATE, dis-in-vig'or-[=a]t, _v.t._ to weaken.

DISINVOLVE, dis-in-volv', _v.t._ to unfold, to disentangle.

DISIPPUS, di-sip'us, _n._ an American papilionid butterfly.

DISJASKIT, dis-jas'kit, _adj._ (_Scot._) jaded, worn out. [Prob.
_dejected_.]

DISJOIN, dis-join', or diz-, _v.t._ to separate what has been
joined.--_v.t._ DISJOINT', to put out of joint: to separate united parts:
to break the natural order or relations of things: to make
incoherent.--_p.adj._ DISJOINT'ED, incoherent, esp. of discourse: badly
assorted.--_adv._ DISJOINT'EDLY.--_n._ DISJOINT'EDNESS. [O. Fr.
_desjoindre_--L. _disjung[)e]re_--_dis_, apart, _jung[)e]re_, to join.]

DISJUNCT, dis-jungkt', _adj._ disjoined--_n._ DISJUNC'TION, the act of
disjoining: disunion: separation.--_adj._ DISJUNCT'IVE, disjoining: tending
to separate: (_gram._) uniting sentences but disjoining the sense, or
rather marking an adverse sense.--_n._ a word which disjoins.--_adv._
DISJUNCT'IVELY.--_ns._ DISJUNCT'OR; DISJUNCT'URE. [O. Fr. _desjoinct_,
_desjoindre_. See above.]

DISJUNE, a Scotch form of _dejeune_, _dejeuner_ (q.v.).

DISK. Same as DISC.

DISLEAF, dis-l[=e]f', _v.t._ to deprive of leaves.--Also DISLEAVE'.

DISLEAL, dis-l[=e]l', _adj._ (_Spens._) disloyal, dishonourable. [See
DISLOYAL.]

DISLIKE, dis-l[=i]k', _v.t._ to be displeased with: to disapprove of: to
have an aversion to.--_n._ disinclination: aversion: distaste:
disapproval.--_adjs._ DISLIKE'ABLE, DISLIK'ABLE; DISLIKE'FUL
(_Spens._)--_v.t._ DISLIK'EN (_Shak._), to make unlike.--_n._ DISLIKE'NESS
(_obs._), unlikeness. [L. _dis_, neg., and _like_; the genuine Eng. word is
_mislike_.]

DISLIMB, dis-lim', _v.t._ to tear the limbs from.

DISLIMN, dis-lim', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to strike out what has been limned or
painted, to efface.

DISLINK, dis-lingk', _v.t._ to unlink, to separate.

DISLOAD, dis-l[=o]d', _v.t._ to unload, to disburden.

DISLOCATE, dis'l[=o]-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to displace: to put out of
joint.--_adv._ DISLOC[=A]'TEDLY.--_n._ DISLOC[=A]'TION, a dislocated joint:
displacement: (_geol._) a 'fault,' or displacement of stratified rocks.
[Low L. _disloc[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--L., _dis_, apart, _loc[=a]re_, to
place.]

DISLODGE, dis-loj', _v.t._ to drive from a lodgment or place of rest: to
drive from a place of hiding or of defence.--_v.i._ to go away.--_n._
DISLODG'MENT. [O. Fr. _desloger_, _des_--L. _dis_, apart, _loger_, to
lodge.]

DISLOIGN, dis-loin', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to put far apart or at a distance,
to remove. [O. Fr. _desloignier_, _des_--L. _dis_, apart, _loignier_, to
remove.]

DISLOYAL, dis-loi'al, _adj._ not loyal: false to one's sovereign:
faithless: treacherous.--_adv._ DISLOY'ALLY.--_n._ DISLOY'ALTY. [O. Fr.
_desloyal_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _loyal_, _leial_--L. _legalis_, legal.]

DISLUSTRE, dis-lus't[.e]r, _v.t._ to deprive of lustre.

DISMAL, diz'mal, _adj._ gloomy: dreary: sorrowful: depressing.--_adv._
DIS'MALLY.--_ns._ DIS'MALNESS, DISMAL'ITY.--_n.pl._ DIS'MALS,
mournings.--THE DISMALS, the dumps. [O. Fr. _dismal_ = L. _dies mali_,
evil, unlucky days. Skeat makes O. Fr. _dismal_ correspond to Low L.
_decimalis_, of a tenth, pertaining to tithes--L. _decimus_,
tenth--_decem_, ten.]

DISMAN, dis-man', _v.t._ to deprive of men (of a country, or ship): to
unman: to deprive of human character (of the body by death).

DISMANTLE, dis-man'tl, _v.t._ to strip: to deprive of furniture, fittings,
&c., so as to render useless: of a fortified town, to raze the
fortifications. [O. Fr. _desmanteller_--_des_--L. _dis_, away, _manteler_,
_mantel_, a mantle.]

DISMASK, dis-mask', _v.t._ to strip a mask from: to remove a disguise from:
to uncover. [O. Fr. _desmasquer_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _masquer_, to
mask.]

DISMAST, dis-mast', _v.t._ to deprive of a mast or masts.--_n._
DISMAST'MENT.

DISMAY, dis-m[=a]', _v.t._ to terrify: to discourage.--_n._ loss of
strength and courage through fear.--_n._ DISMAY'EDNESS.--_adj._ DISMAY'FUL
(_Spens._). [A hybrid word, from an O. Fr. _desmayer_--_des_ (= L. _dis_),
and Old High Ger. _magan_ (Ger. _mögen_) = A.S. _magan_, to have might or
power. See MAY.]

DISMAYD, dis-m[=a]d', _adj._ (_Spens._) misshapen, deformed.

DISMAYL, dis-m[=a]l', _v.t._ to deprive of mail: (_Spens._) to break open
one's coat of mail. [O. Fr. _desmailler_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _maille_,
mail.]

DISME, d[=e]m, _n._ a tenth: (_Shak._) the number ten. [O. Fr. See DIME.]

DISMEMBER, dis-mem'b[.e]r, _v.t._ to divide member from member: to separate
a limb from the body: to disjoint: to tear to pieces.--_ns._
DISMEM'BERMENT; DISMEM'BRATOR. [O. Fr. _desmembrer_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg.,
_membre_, a member.]

DISMISS, dis-mis', _v.t._ to send away: to despatch: to discard: to remove
from office or employment: (_law_) to reject, to put out of court, to
discharge.--_ns._ DISMISS'AL, DISMIS'SION.--_adjs._ DISMISS'IVE,
DISMISS'ORY. [L. _dis_, away, _mitt[)e]re_, _missum_, to send.]

DISMORTGAGE, dis-mor'g[=a]j, _v.t._ to redeem from mortgage.

DISMOUNT, dis-mownt', _v.i._ to come down: to come off a horse.--_v.t._ to
throw or bring down from any elevated place: to throw off their carriages,
as cannon: to unhorse. [O. Fr. _desmonter_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg.,
_monter_, to mount.]

DISNATURED, dis-n[=a]'t[=u]rd, _adj._ unnatural, devoid of natural
affection.--_v.t._ DISNAT'URALISE, to make alien or unnatural.

DISNEST, dis-nest', _v.t._ to dislodge from a nest.

DISOBEDIENT, dis-o-b[=e]'di-ent, _adj._ neglecting or refusing to
obey.--_n._ DISOB[=E]'DIENCE, neglect or refusal to obey: violation of
orders.--_adv._ DISOB[=E]'DIENTLY.

DISOBEY, dis-o-b[=a]', _v.t._ to neglect or refuse to obey or do what is
commanded. [O. Fr. _desobeir_--_des_ (= L. _dis_), and _obeir_, to obey.]

DISOBLIGE, dis-o-bl[=i]j', _v.t._ to offend by an act of unkindness or
incivility: to do something against the wishes of another: to injure
slightly.--_n._ DISOBLIG[=A]'TION, freedom from obligation: act of
disobliging.--_adj._ DISOB'LIGATORY, releasing from obligation.--_n._
DISOBLIGE'MENT.--_adj._ DISOBLIG'ING, not obliging: not careful to attend
to the wishes of others: unaccommodating: unkind.--_adv._
DISOBLIG'INGLY.--_n._ DISOBLIG'INGNESS. [O. Fr. _desobliger_, _des_ (= L.
_dis_), neg., _obliger_, to oblige.]

DISOMATOUS, d[=i]-s[=o]'ma-tus, _adj._ having two bodies.

DISORBED, dis-orbd', _adj._ (_Shak._) thrown from its orbit, as a star.

DISORDER, dis-or'd[.e]r, _n._ want of order: confusion: disturbance: breach
of the peace: disease.--_v.t._ to throw out of order: to disarrange: to
disturb: to produce disease.--_adj._ DISOR'DERED, confused, deranged.--_n._
DISOR'DERLINESS.--_adj._ DISOR'DERLY, out of order: in confusion:
irregular: lawless: defying the restraints of decency.--_adv._ confusedly:
in a lawless manner.--DISORDERLY HOUSE, a brothel. [O. Fr. _desordre_,
_des_ (= L. _dis_), neg., _ordre_, order.]

DISORDINATE, dis-or'din-[=a]t, _adj._ (_rare_) not in order:
irregular.--_adv._ DISOR'DINATELY.

DISORGANISE, dis-or'gan-[=i]z, _v.t._ to destroy the organic structure of:
to break up a union of parts: to disorder.--_adj._ DISORGAN'IC.--_n._
DISORGANIS[=A]'TION.

DISORIENT, dis-[=o]'ri-ent, _v.t._ to turn from the east: to confuse as to
direction in general--also DISORIEN'TATE.--_n._ DISORIENT[=A]'TION.

DISOWN, diz-[=o]n', _v.t._ to refuse to own or acknowledge as belonging to
one's self: to deny: to repudiate, cast off--_n._ DISOWN'MENT.

DISOXYDATE, dis-ok'si-d[=a]t, _v.t._ to deoxidate or deprive of
oxygen.--Also DISOX'YGENATE.

DISPACE, dis-p[=a]s', _v.i._ (_Spens._) to pace to and fro, to range about.

DISPARAGE, dis-par'[=a]j, _v.t._ to dishonour by comparison with what is
inferior: to lower in rank or estimation: to talk slightingly of.--_ns._
DISPAR'AGEMENT; DISPAR'AGER.--_adv._ DISPAR'AGINGLY. [O. Fr.
_desparager_--_des_ (--L. _dis_), neg., and Low L. _paragium_, equality of
birth--L. _par_, equal.]

DISPARATE, dis'par-[=a]t, _adj._ unequal: incapable of being
compared.--_n._ DISPARATE'NESS.--_n.pl._ DIS'PARATES, things or characters
of different species. [L. _dispar[=a]tus_--_dis_, neg., and _par[=a]re_,
make equal.]

DISPARITY, dis-par'i-ti, _n._ inequality: unlikeness so great as to render
comparison difficult and union unsuitable.

DISPARK, dis-pärk', _v.t._ to throw open enclosed ground.

DISPART, dis-pärt', _v.t._ to part asunder: to divide, to separate.--_v.i._
to separate.--_n._ the difference between the thickness of metal at the
breech and the mouth of a gun.

DISPASSION, dis-pash'un, _n._ freedom from passion: a calm state of
mind.--_adj._ DISPAS'SION[=A]TE, free from passion: unmoved by feelings:
cool: impartial.--_adv._ DISPAS'SION[=A]TELY.

DISPATCH. Same as DESPATCH.

DISPATHY, dis'pa-thi, _n._ difference of feeling, the opposite of
_sympathy_.

DISPAUPERISE, dis-paw-per-[=i]z', _v.t._ to free from pauperism or from
paupers.--_v.t._ DISPAU'PER, to declare no longer a pauper.

DISPEACE, dis-p[=e]s', _n._ lack of peace: dissension. [A recent coinage
from _dis_, neg., and _peace_.]

DISPEL, dis-pel', _v.t._ to drive away: to make disappear: to
banish:--_pr.p._ dispel'ling; _pa.p._ dispelled'. [L.
_dispell[)e]re_--_dis_, away, _pell[)e]re_, to drive.]

DISPENCE, dis-pens' (_Spens._). Same as DISPENSE.

DISPEND, dis-pend', _v.t._ (_arch._) to expend, pay out. [O. Fr.,--L.
_dis_, out of, and _pend[)e]re_, to weigh.]

DISPENSABLE, dis-pens'a-bl, _adj._ that may be dispensed, or dispensed
with: (_arch._) pardonable.--_ns._ DISPENSABIL'ITY, DISPENS'ABLENESS.

DISPENSARY, dis-pens'ar-i, _n._ a place where medicines are dispensed, esp.
to the poor, gratis.

DISPENSATION, dis-pen-s[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of dispensing or dealing
out: various methods or stages of God's dealing with His
creatures--_Patriarchal_, _Mosaic_, _Christian_: the distribution of good
and evil in the divine government: license or permission to neglect a
rule.--_adjs._ DISPENS'ATIVE, DISPENS'ATORY, granting
dispensation.--_advs._ DISPENS'ATIVELY, DISPENS'ATORILY.--_n._
DISPENS'ATORY, a book containing medical prescriptions.--_adj._
DISPENS'ING.

DISPENSE, dis-pens', _v.t._ to deal out in portions: to distribute: to
administer: (_Spens._) to pay for.--_n._ expense: profession:
abundance.--_adj._ DISPENSED'.--_n._ DISPENS'ER.--DISPENSE WITH, to permit
the want of: to do without. [Fr. _dispenser_--L. _dis_, asunder, _pensare_,
inten. of _pend[)e]re_, to weigh.]

DISPEOPLE, dis-p[=e]'pl, _v.t._ to empty of inhabitants.

DISPERMOUS, d[=i]-sp[.e]rm'us, _adj._ having only two seeds. [Gr. _di-_,
twofold, _sperma_, a seed.]

DISPERSE, dis-p[.e]rs', _v.t._ to scatter in all directions: to spread: to
diffuse: to drive asunder: to cause to vanish.--_v.i._ to separate: to
spread abroad: to vanish.--_n._ DISPERS'AL.--_adv._ DISPERS'EDLY.--_ns._
DISPERS'EDNESS; DISPERS'ER.--_adj._ DISPERS'IVE, tending to disperse. [L.
_dispergere_, _dispersum_--_di_, asunder, apart, _sparg[)e]re_, to
scatter.]

DISPERSION, dis-p[.e]r'shun, _n._ a scattering, or state of being
scattered: (_med._) the removal of inflammation: (_opt._) the separation of
light into its different rays: the Diaspora (q.v.).

DISPERSONATE, dis-per'son-[=a]t, _v.t._ to divest of personality.

DISPIRIT, dis-pir'it, _v.t._ to dishearten: to discourage.--_p.adj._
DISPIR'ITED, dejected: feeble, spiritless.--_adv._ DISPIR'ITEDLY.--_n._
DISPIR'ITEDNESS.--_p.adj._ DISPIR'ITING, disheartening.--_n._
DISPIR'ITMENT.

DISPITEOUS, dis-pit'e-us, _adj._ pitiless.--_adv._ DISPIT'EOUSLY.--_n._
DISPIT'EOUSNESS. [See DESPITE.]

DISPLACE, dis-pl[=a]s', _v.t._ to put out of place: to disarrange: to
remove from a state, office, or dignity.--_adj._ DISPLACE'ABLE.--_n._
DISPLACE'MENT, a putting out of place: the difference between the position
of a body at a given time and that occupied at first: the quantity of water
displaced by a ship afloat. [O. Fr. _desplacer_--L. _dis_, neg., and
_place_.]

DISPLANT, dis-plant', _v.t._ to remove anything from where it has been
planted or placed: to drive from an abode.--_n._ DISPLANT[=A]'TION.
[Through Fr. from L. _dis_, neg., and _plant[=a]re_, to plant.]

DISPLAY, dis-pl[=a]', _v.t._ to unfold or spread out: to exhibit: to set
out ostentatiously: (_print._) to make prominent by large type, wide
spacing, &c.--_n._ a displaying or unfolding: exhibition: ostentatious
show.--_p.adj._ DISPLAYED', unfolded: spread: printed in prominent letters:
(_her._) erect, with wings expanded, as a bird.--_n._ DISPLAY'ER. [O. Fr.
_despleier_--_des_ (= L. _dis_), neg., and _plier_, _ploier_--L.
_plic[=a]re_, to fold; doublet, _deploy_. See PLY.]

DISPLE, dis'pl, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to discipline, chastise. [A contraction
of _disciple_.]

DISPLEASE, dis-pl[=e]z', _v.t._ to offend: to make angry in a slight
degree: to be disagreeable to.--_v.i._ to raise aversion.--_n._
DISPLEAS'ANCE (_Spens._), displeasure.--_adj._ DISPLEAS'ANT
(_obs._).--_p.adj._ DISPLEASED', vexed, annoyed.--_adv._
DISPLEAS'EDLY.--_n._ DISPLEAS'EDNESS.--_p.adj._ DISPLEAS'ING, causing
displeasure: giving offence.--_adv._ DISPLEAS'INGLY.--_n._
DISPLEAS'INGNESS. [O. Fr. _desplaisir_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _plaisir_,
to please.]

DISPLEASURE, dis-plezh'[=u]r, _n._ the feeling of one who is offended:
anger: cause of irritation.--_v.t._ (_arch._) to displease, offend.

DISPLENISH, dis-plen'ish, _v.t._ to deprive of plenishing or furniture,
implements, &c.: to sell the plenishing of.--_n._ DISPLEN'ISHMENT.

DISPLODE, dis-pl[=o]d', _v.t._ (_Milt._) to discharge, to explode.--_v.i._
to explode.--_n._ DISPLO'SION. [L. _displod[)e]re_--_dis_, asunder,
_plaud[)e]re_, to beat.]

DISPLUME, dis-pl[=oo]m', _v.t._ to deprive of plumes or feathers.

DISPONDEE, d[=i]-spon'd[=e], _n._ a double spondee.--_adj._ DISPOND[=A]'IC.

DISPONE, dis-p[=o]n', _v.t._ (_arch._) to set in order, dispose: (_Scots
law_) to make over to another: to convey legally.--_n._ DISPON[=EE]', the
person to whom anything is disponed. [Fr.,--L. _dispon[)e]re_, to arrange.]

DISPONGE, DISPUNGE, dis-punj', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to sprinkle, as with water
from a sponge.

DISPORT, dis-p[=o]rt', _v.t._ and _v.i._ usually reflexive, to divert,
amuse, enjoy one's self: to move in gaiety.--_n._ DISPORT'MENT. [O. Fr.
_desporter_ (with _se_), to carry one's self away from one's work, to amuse
one's self, from _des_ (= L. _dis_), and _porter_--L. _port[=a]re_, to
carry. See SPORT.]

DISPOSE, dis-p[=o]z', _v.t._ to arrange: to distribute: to apply to a
particular purpose: to make over by sale, gift, &c.: to bestow: to
incline.--_n._ disposal, management: behaviour, disposition.--_adj._
DISPOS'ABLE.--_n._ DISPOS'AL, the act of disposing: order: arrangement:
management: right of bestowing.--_p.adj._ DISPOSED', inclined, of a certain
disposition (with _well_, _ill_, &c.).--_adv._ DISPOS'EDLY, in good order:
with measured steps.--_n._ DISPOS'ER.--_p.adj._ DISPOS'ING, that
disposes.--_adv._ DISPOS'INGLY.--DISPOSE OF, to place in any condition: to
apply to any purpose: to part with: to get rid of: to sell. [Fr.
_disposer_, _dis_--L. _dis_, asunder, _poser_, to place.]

DISPOSITION, dis-po-zish'un, _n._ arrangement: plan for disposing one's
property, &c.: natural tendency: temper: (_N.T._) ministration: (_Scots
law_) a giving over to another = conveyance or assignment in Eng.
phraseology--often 'disposition and settlement,' a deed for the disposal of
a man's property at his death.--_adjs._ DISPOSI'TIONAL; DISPOSI'TIONED;
DISPOS'ITIVE.--_adv._ DISPOS'ITIVELY.--_ns._ DISPOS'ITOR, a planet that
disposes or controls another; DISP[=O]'SURE (_obs._), disposal,
arrangement: disposition. [Fr.,--L., from _dis_, apart, _pon[)e]re_, to
place.]

DISPOSSESS, dis-poz-zes', _v.t._ to put out of possession.--_n._
DISPOSSESS'OR.

DISPOST, dis-p[=o]st', _v.t._ to displace.

DISPRAISE, dis-pr[=a]z', _n._ blame: reproach: dishonour.--_v.t._ to blame:
to censure.--_n._ DISPRAIS'ER.--_adv._ DISPRAIS'INGLY. [O. Fr.
_despreisier_, _des_--L. _dis_, neg., _preisier_, to praise.]

DISPREAD, dis-pred', _v.t._ to spread in different ways.--_v.i._ to spread
out: to expand.--Spenser has the forms _dispred_, _dispredden_, _disprad_.

DISPRINCED, dis-prinst', _p.adj._ (_Tenn._) deprived of the appearance of a
prince.

DISPRISON, dis-priz'n, _v.t._ to set free.

DISPRIVACIED, dis-priv'a-sid, _adj._ deprived of privacy.

DISPRIVILEGE, dis-priv'i-lej, _v.t._ to deprive of a privilege.

DISPRIZE, dis-pr[=i]z', _v.t._ to set a low price upon: to undervalue.

DISPROFESS, dis-pr[=o]-fes', _v.t._ (_Spens._) to cease to profess.

DISPROFIT, dis-prof'it, _n._ loss, damage.

DISPROOF, dis-pr[=oo]f', _n._ a disproving: refutation.

DISPROPERTY, dis-prop'[.e]r-ti, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to deprive of any
property.

DISPROPORTION, dis-pro-p[=o]r'shun, _n._ want of proportion, symmetry, or
suitableness of parts: inequality.--_v.t._ to make unsuitable in form or
size, &c.--_n._ DISPROPOR'TIONABLENESS.--_adv._
DISPROPOR'TIONABLY.--_adjs._ DISPROPOR'TIONAL, DISPROPOR'TIONABLE
(_arch._).--_advs._ DISPROPOR'TIONALLY, DISPROPOR'TIONABLY
(_arch._).--_adj._ DISPROPOR'TIONATE, not proportioned: unsymmetrical:
unsuitable to something else in some respect.--_adv._
DISPROPOR'TIONATELY.--_n._ DISPROPOR'TIONATENESS.

DISPROPRIATE, dis-pr[=o]'pri-[=a]t, _v.t._ to disappropriate.

DISPROVE, dis-pr[=oo]v', _v.t._ to prove to be false or not genuine: to
refute: (_arch._) to disapprove.--_n._ DISPROV'AL. [O. Fr. _disprover_. See
PROVE.]

DISPURSE, dis-purs', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to take out of the purse, to pay.

DISPURVEY, dis-pur-v[=a]', _v.t._ (_arch._) to deprive of provisions.--_n._
DISPURVEY'ANCE (_Spens._).

DISPUTE, dis-p[=u]t', _v.t._ to make a subject of argument: to contend for:
to oppose by argument: to call in question.--_v.i._ to argue: to
debate.--_n._ a contest with words: an argument: a debate: a
quarrel.--_adj._ DIS'PUTABLE, that may be disputed: of doubtful
certainty.--_n._ DIS'PUTABLENESS.--_adv._ DIS'PUTABLY.--_ns._ DIS'PUTANT,
DISPUT'ER; DISPUT[=A]'TION, a contest in argument: an exercise in
debate.--_adjs._ DISPUT[=A]'TIOUS, DISPUT'ATIVE, inclined to dispute,
cavil, or controvert.--_adv._ DISPUT[=A]'TIOUSLY.--_n._
DISPUT[A]'TIOUSNESS.--BEYOND, or WITHOUT, DISPUTE, indubitably, certainly.
[O. Fr. _disputer_--L. _disput[=a]re_--_dis_, apart, and _put[=a]re_, to
think.]

DISQUALIFY, dis-kwol'i-f[=i], _v.t._ to deprive of the qualities necessary
for any purpose: to make unfit: to disable.--_n._ DISQUALIFIC[=A]'TION,
state of being disqualified: anything that disqualifies or incapacitates.

DISQUIET, dis-kw[=i]'et, _adj._ (_obs._) unquiet, uneasy, restless.--_n._
want of quiet: uneasiness, restlessness: anxiety.--_v.t._ to render
unquiet: to make uneasy: to disturb.--_adjs._ DISQU[=I]'ETFUL;
DISQU[=I]'ETIVE, DISQU[=I]'ETING.--_adv._ DISQU[=I]'ETLY (_Shak._).--_ns._
DISQU[=I]'ETNESS, DISQU[=I]'ETUDE.--_adj._ DISQU[=I]'ETOUS.

DISQUISITION, dis-kwi-zish'un, _n._ a careful inquiry into any matter by
arguments, &c.: an essay.--_adjs._ DISQUISI'TIONAL, DISQUISI'TIONARY,
DISQUIS'ITORY, DISQUIS'ITIVE, pertaining to or of the nature of a
disquisition. [L. _disquisitio_--_disquir[)e]re_, _disquisitum_--_dis_,
inten., _quær[)e]re_, to seek.]

DISRANK, dis-rangk', _v.t._ to reduce to a lower rank: to throw into
confusion.

DISRATE, dis-r[=a]t', _v.t._ (_naut._) to reduce to a lower rating or rank,
as a petty officer.

DISREGARD, dis-re-gärd', _v.t._ to pay no attention to.--_n._ want of
attention: neglect: slight.--_adj._ DISREGARD'FUL--_adv._ DISREGARD'FULLY.

DISRELISH, dis-rel'ish, _v.t._ not to relish: to dislike the taste of: to
dislike.--_n._ distaste: dislike: disgust.--_p.adj._ DISREL'ISHING,
offensive.

DISREMEMBER, dis-re-mem'b[.e]r, _v.t._ (_vul._) not to remember, to forget.

DISREPAIR, dis-re-p[=a]r', _n._ state of being out of repair.

DISREPUTE, dis-re-p[=u]t', _n._ ill-character: discredit--also
DISREPUT[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DISREP'UTABLE, in bad repute:
disgraceful.--_ns._ DISREP'UTABLENESS, DISREPUTABIL'ITY (_rare_).--_adv._
DISREP'UTABLY.

DISRESPECT, dis-re-spekt', _n._ want of respect: discourtesy:
incivility.--_v.t._ (_arch._) not to respect.--_adjs._ DISRESPECT'ABLE
(_rare_), not respectable; DISRESPECT'FUL, showing disrespect: irreverent:
uncivil.--_adv._ DISRESPECT'FULLY.--_n._ DISRESPECT'FULNESS.

DISROBE, dis-r[=o]b', _v.t._ to undress: to uncover.

DISROOT, dis-r[=oo]t', _v.t._ to tear up by the roots.

DISRUPT, dis-rupt', _v.t._ to burst asunder, to break up.--_n._
DISRUP'TION, the act of breaking asunder: the act of bursting and rending:
breach: in Scottish ecclesiastical history, the separation of the party who
became the Free Church from the Established Church for the sake of
spiritual independence (1843).--_adj._ DISRUP'TIVE, causing, or accompanied
by, disruption. [L. _disruptus_, _diruptus_, _dirump[)e]re_--_dis_,
asunder, _rump[)e]re_, to break.]

DISS, dis, _n._ an Algerian reedy grass used for cordage.

DISSATISFACTORY, dis-sat-is-fak'tor-i, _adj._ causing dissatisfaction:
unable to give content.--_ns._ DISSATISFAC'TION, state of being
dissatisfied: discontent: uneasiness; DISSATISFAC'TORINESS.

DISSATISFY, dis-sat'is-f[=i], _v.t._ not to satisfy: to make discontented:
to displease.--_adj._ DISSAT'ISFIED, discontented: not pleased.

DISSEAT, dis-s[=e]t', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to deprive of, or remove from, a
seat.

DISSECT, dis-sekt', _v.t._ to cut asunder: to cut into parts for the
purpose of minute examination: to divide and examine: to analyse and
criticise (often hostilely, as a man's character or motives).--_adj._
DISSECT'IBLE.--_ns._ DISSECT'ING; DISSEC'TION, the act or the art of
cutting in pieces a plant or animal in order to ascertain the structure of
its parts: anatomy.--_adj._ DISSECT'IVE, tending to dissect.--_n._
DISSECT'OR.--DISSECTED MAP, PICTURE, a map or picture on a board cut into
pieces, so that the putting of them together forms a puzzle. [L.
_dissec[=a]re_, _dissectum_--_dis_, asunder, _sec[=a]re_, to cut.]

DISSEIZE, dis-s[=e]z', _v.t._ to deprive of seizin or possession of an
estate of freehold: to dispossess wrongfully.--_ns._ DISSEIZ'IN;
DISSEIZ'OR.

DISSEMBLE, dis-sem'bl, _v.t._ to represent a thing as unlike what it
actually is: to put an untrue semblance upon: to disguise: to conceal:
(_Shak._) to make unlike.--_v.i._ to assume a false appearance: to play the
hypocrite: to dissimulate--_ns._ DISSEM'BLANCE (_rare_), want of
resemblance: the act of dissembling; DISSEM'BLER; DISSEM'BLING.--_p.adj._
deceiving, hypocritical.--_adv._ DISSEM'BLINGLY. [O. Fr. _dessembler_, to
be unlike, from L. _dissimul[=a]re_--_dissimilis_, unlike--_dis_, neg., and
_similis_, like.]

DISSEMINATE, dis-sem'i-n[=a]t, _v.t._ to sow or scatter abroad: to
propagate: to diffuse.--_n._ DISSEMIN[=A]'TION.--_adj._
DISSEM'INATIVE.--_n._ DISSEM'INATOR. [L. _disseminare_, _-[=a]tum_--_dis_,
asunder, _semin[=a]re_, to sow--_semen_, _seminis_, seed.]

DISSENT, dis-sent', _v.i._ to think differently: to disagree in opinion: to
differ (with _from_).--_n._ the act of dissenting: difference of opinion: a
protest by a minority: a differing or separation from an established
church.--_ns._ DISSEN'SION, disagreement in opinion: discord: strife;
DISSENT'ER, one who separates on conscientious grounds from the service and
worship of an established church: a nonconformist; DISSENT'ERAGE, condition
of dissenters; DISSENT'ERISM (_rare_).--_adj._ DISSEN'TIENT, declaring
dissent: disagreeing.--_n._ one who disagrees: one who declares his
dissent.--_p.adj._ DISSENT'ING.--_adv._ DISSENT'INGLY.--_adj._ DISSEN'TIOUS
(_Shak._), disposed to discord, contentious. [Fr.,--L. _dissent[=i]re_,
_dissensum_--_dis_, apart from, _sent[=i]re_, to think.]

DISSEPIMENT, dis-sep'i-ment, _n._ (_bot._) a partition in compound ovaries
formed by the union of the sides of their carpels.--_adj._ DISSEPIMENT'AL.
[Low L. _dissepimentum_, a partition--L. _dissæp[=i]re_--_dis_, apart,
_sep[=i]re_, to hedge in.]

DISSERTATE, dis'er-t[=a]t, _v.i._ to discourse--(_arch._) DISSERT'.--_n._
DISSERT[=A]'TION, a formal discourse: a treatise.--_adjs._
DISSERT[=A]'TIONAL, DISSERT[=A]'TIVE.--_n._ DIS'SERT[=A]TOR. [Fr.,--L.
_dissert[=a]re_, inten. of _disser[)e]re_, to discuss--_dis_, _ser[)e]re_,
to put in a row.]

DISSERVE, dis-serv', _v.t._ to do the opposite of serving: (_rare_) to
injure.--_n._ DISSERV'ICE, injury: mischief: an ill turn.--_adj._
DISSERV'ICEABLE. [O. Fr. _desservir_--L. _dis_, neg., _serv[=i]re_, to
serve.]

DISSETTLE, dis-set'l, _v.t._ to unsettle.--_adj._ DISSETT'LED.--_n._
DISSETT'LEMENT.

DISSEVER, dis-sev'[.e]r, _v.t._ to sever: to part in two: to separate: to
disunite.--_ns._ DISSEV'ERANCE, DISSEVER[=A]'TION, DISSEV'ERMENT, a
dissevering or parting.--_p.adj._ DISSEV'ERED, disunited. [O. Fr.
_dessevrer_--L. _dis_, apart, _seper[=a]re_, to separate.]

DISSHEATHE, dis-sh[=e]th', _v.t._ to unsheathe.

DISSIDENT, dis'i-dent, _adj._ dissenting.--_n._ a dissenter.--_n._
DISS'IDENCE, disagreement. [L. _dissidens_, _-entis_, pr.p. of
_dissid[=e]re_--_dis_, apart, _sed[=e]re_, to sit.]

DISSIGHT, dis-s[=i]t', _n._ an unsightly object.

DISSILIENT, dis-sil'yent, _adj._ (_bot._) bursting open with elastic
force.--_n._ DISSIL'IENCE. [L. _dissiliens_, _-entis_--_dis_, asunder,
_sal[=i]re_, to leap.]

DISSIMILAR, dis-sim'i-lar, _adj._ not similar: unlike in any respect: of
different sorts.--_ns._ DISSIMILAR'ITY, DISSIMIL'ITUDE, unlikeness: want of
resemblance.--_adv._ DISSIM'ILARLY.--_ns._ DISSIMIL[=A]'TION, the act of
rendering dissimilar; DISSIM'ILE, the opposite of a simile, a comparison by
contrast.

DISSIMULATE, dis-sim'[=u]-l[=a]t, _v.t._ to pretend the contrary of: to
pretend falsely: to conceal.--_v.i._ to practise dissimulation, play the
hypocrite.--_ns._ DISSIMUL[=A]'TION, the act of dissembling: a hiding under
a false appearance: false pretension: hypocrisy; DISSIMUL[=A]'TOR. [L.
_dissimul[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_, to dissimulate--_dis_, neg., _similis_,
like.]

DISSIPATE, dis'i-p[=a]t, _v.t._ to scatter: to squander: to waste.--_v.i._
to separate and disappear: to waste away: (_coll._) to be dissolute in
conduct.--_adj._ DISS'IPABLE, that may be dissipated.--_p.adj._
DISS'IPATED, dissolute, esp. addicted to drinking.--_n._ DISSIP[=A]'TION,
dispersion: state of being dispersed: scattered attention: a dissolute
course of life, esp. hard drinking.--_adj._ DISS'IPATIVE, tending to
dissipate or disperse: connected with the dissipation of energy. [L.
_dissip[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_dis_, asunder, and obs. _sup[=a]re_, which
appears in _insip[)e]re_, to throw into.]

DISSOCIATE, dis-s[=o]'shi-[=a]t, _v.t._ to separate from a society or
company: to disunite: to separate.--_n._ DISSOCIABIL'ITY.--_adjs._
DISS[=O]'CIABLE, not sociable: ill associated: incongruous: capable of
being dissociated; DISS[=O]'CIAL, not social.--_v.t._ DISS[=O]'CIALISE, to
make unsocial.--_n._ DISSOCI[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DISS[=O]'-CIATIVE (_chem._),
tending to dissociate. [L. _dissoci[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_dis_, asunder,
_soci[=a]re_, to unite.]

DISSOLUBLE, dis'ol-[=u]-bl, or dis-zol'[=u]-bl, _adj._ dissolvable.--_ns._
DISSOLUBIL'ITY, DISSOL'UBLENESS, capacity of being dissolved.

DISSOLVE, di-zolv', _v.t._ to loose asunder: to separate or break up: to
put an end to (as a parliament): to melt: to destroy, as by fire: (_arch._)
to resolve, as doubts.--_v.i._ to break up: to waste away: to crumble: to
melt.--_adj._ DISS'OL[=U]TE, loose, esp. in morals: lewd:
licentious.--_adv._ DISS'OL[=U]TELY.--_ns._ DISS'OL[=U]TENESS;
DISSOL[=U]'TION, the breaking up of an assembly: change from a solid to a
liquid state: a melting: separation of a body into its original elements:
decomposition: destruction: death; DISSOL[=U]'TIONISM;
DISSOL[=U]'TIONIST.--_ns._ DISSOLVABIL'ITY, DISSOLV'ABLENESS.--_adjs._
DISSOLV'ABLE, DISSOLV'IBLE, capable of being dissolved or melted.--_n._ and
_adj._ DISSOLV'ENT, a solvent having the power to melt. [L.
_dissolv[)e]re_, _-solutum_--_dis_, asunder, _solv[)e]re_, _sol[=u]tum_, to
loose.]

DISSONANT, dis'o-nant, _adj._ not agreeing or harmonising in sound: without
concord or harmony: disagreeing.--_n._ DISS'ONANCE, disagreement of sound:
want of harmony: discord: disagreement: (_spec._) a combination of musical
sounds which produces beats--also DISS'ONANCY. [Fr.,--L. _dissonans_,
_-antis_--_dis_, apart, _son[=a]re_, to sound.]

DISSUADE, dis-sw[=a]d', _v.t._ to advise against: to try to divert from
anything by advice or persuasion: to succeed in persuading not to.--_ns._
DISSU[=A]'DER; DISSU[=A]'SION.--_adj._ DISSU[=A]'SIVE, tending to
dissuade.--_n._ that which tends to dissuade.--_adv._
DISSU[=A]'SIVELY.--_n._ and _adj._ DISSU[=A]'SORY (_rare_). [Fr.,--L.
_dissuad[=e]re_--_dis_, apart, _suad[=e]re_, _suasum_, to advise.]

DISSUNDER, dis-sun'd[.e]r, _v.t._ to sunder.

DISSYLLABLE, dis-sil'a-bl, _n._ a word of only two syllables.--_adj._
DISSYLLAB'IC.--_n._ DISSYLLABIFIC[=A]'TION.--_v.t._ DISSYLLAB'IFY, to make
into two syllables.--_n._ DISSYLL'ABISM, the character of having only two
syllables. [Through Fr. and L. from Gr. _di-_, twice, _syllab[=e]_, a
syllable.]

DISSYMMETRY, dis-sim'e-tri, _n._ want of symmetry.--_adjs._ DISSYMMET'RIC,
-AL, of similar shape, but not capable of being superposed, as right and
left hand gloves, crystals with different optical properties, &c.

DISTAFF, dis'taf, _n._ the stick which holds the bunch of flax, tow, or
wool in spinning.--DISTAFF SIDE, the female part of a family. [A.S.
_distæf_, from _dise_ = Low Ger. _diesse_, the bunch of flax on the staff;
and _stæf_ = Eng. staff. See DIZEN.]

DISTAIN, dis-t[=a]n', _v.t._ to stain: to sully. [O. Fr. _desteindre_, to
take away the colour of--L. _dis_, neg., and _ting[)e]re_, to stain. See
STAIN.]

DISTAL, dis'tal, _adj._ (_anat._) at the end.--_adv._ DIS'TALLY. [Formed on
the analogy of _central_, from DISTANCE.]

DISTANCE, dis'tans, _n._ a space or interval between: remoteness:
opposition: reserve of manner: in horse-racing, the space measured back
from the winning-post which a horse, in heat-races, must reach when the
winner has covered the whole course, in order to run in the final
heat.--_v.t._ to place at a distance: to leave at a distance
behind.--_adj._ DIS'TANCELESS, not allowing a distant view--said of hazy
weather: having no indications of distance--said of certain pictures.--KEEP
ONE AT A DISTANCE, to treat with reserve; KEEP ONE'S DISTANCE, to abstain
from familiarity with, to keep aloof from. [See DISTANT.]

DISTANT, dis'tant, _adj._ at a certain distance: remote, in time, place, or
connection: not obvious: indistinct: reserved in manner.--_adv._
DIS'TANTLY. [Fr.,--L. _distans_, _-tantis_--_dis_, apart, _stans_,
_stantis_, pr.p. of _st[=a]re_, to stand.]

DISTASTE, dis-t[=a]st', _n._ oppositeness or aversion of taste: dislike of
food: dislike: disgust.--_v.t._ (_arch._) to dislike: (_obs._) to offend:
(_Shak._) to spoil the taste of.--_v.i._ (_Shak._) to be
distasteful.--_adj._ DISTASTE'FUL, nauseous to the taste: unpleasant:
(_Shak._) indicating distaste.--_adv._ DISTASTE'FULLY.--_n._
DISTASTE'FULNESS.

DISTEMPER, dis-tem'p[.e]r, _n._ a coarse mode of painting, in which the
colours are mixed in a watery glue, white of egg, &c., chiefly used in
scene-painting and in staining paper for walls.--Also DESTEM'PER. [Same
ety. as succeeding word.]

DISTEMPER, dis-tem'p[.e]r, _n._ a morbid or disorderly state of body or
mind: disease, esp. of animals, specifically a typhoid inflammation of the
mucous membranes of young dogs: ill-humour.--_v.t._ to derange the temper:
to disorder or disease.--_adj._ DISTEM'PERATE, not temperate, immoderate:
diseased.--_n._ DISTEM'PERATURE (_arch._), want of proper temperature:
intemperateness, disturbance: uneasiness of mind: indisposition.--_p.adj._
DISTEM'PERED, disordered: intemperate, ill-humoured, put out of sorts. [O.
Fr. _destemprer_, to derange--L. _dis_, apart, _temper[=a]re_, to govern.]

DISTEND, dis-tend', _v.t._ to stretch in all directions: to swell.--_v.i._
to swell.--_n._ DISTENSIBIL'ITY, capacity for distension.--_adjs._
DISTEN'SIBLE, that may be stretched; DISTEN'SIVE, capable of stretching or
of being stretched; DISTENT' (_Spens._), distended.--_ns._ DISTEN'TION,
DISTEN'SION, act of distending or stretching: state of being stretched:
(_rare_) breadth. [Fr.,--L. _distend[)e]re_--_dis_, asunder, _tend[)e]re_,
_tensum_ or _tentum_, to stretch.]

DISTHENE, dis'th[=e]n, _n._ cyanite--so called from its positive and
negative electric properties. [Gr. _di-_, two, _sthenos_, strength.]

DISTHRONE, dis-thr[=o]n', _v.t._ (_obs._) to dethrone--(_Spens._)
DISTHR[=O]N'ISE.

DISTICH, dis'tik, _n._ a couple of lines or verses, making complete sense:
a couplet.--_adj._ having two rows.--_adj._ DIS'TICHOUS (_bot._), arranged
in two rows. [L.,--Gr. _distichos_--_dis_, twice, _stichos_, a line.]

DISTIL, dis-til', _v.i._ to fall in drops; to flow gently: to use a
still.--_v.t._ to let or cause to fall in drops: to convert a liquid into
vapour by heat, and then to condense it again: to extract the spirit or
essential oil from anything by evaporation and condensation:--_pr.p._
distil'ling; _pa.p._ distilled'.--_adj._ DISTIL'LABLE.--_ns._
DISTIL'L[=A]TE, the product of distillation; DISTILL[=A]'TION, the act of
distilling.--_adj._ DISTIL'LATORY, of or for distilling.--_ns._ DISTIL'LER;
DISTIL'LERY, a place where distilling is carried on; DISTIL'LING, the
action of the verb _distil_, distillation; DISTIL'MENT (_Shak._), that
which is distilled.--DESTRUCTIVE DISTILLATION, the collection of the
volatile matters released when a substance is destroyed by heat in a close
vessel (as coal in making gas); FRACTIONAL DISTILLATION, the separation by
distilling liquids having different boiling-points, the heat being
gradually increased and the receiver changed. [O. Fr. _distiller_--L.
_distill[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_de_, down, _still[=a]re_, to drop--_stilla_,
a drop.]

DISTINCT, dis-tingkt', _adj._ separate: different: well-defined: clear:
(_Spens._, _Milt._) adorned.--_adj._ DISTINCTIVE, marking or expressing
difference.--_adv._ DISTINCT'IVELY.--_n._ DISTINCT'IVENESS.--_adv._
DISTINCT'LY.--_ns._ DISTINCT'NESS; DISTINCT'URE, distinctness. [See
DISTINGUISH.]

DISTINCTION, dis-tingk'shun, _n._ separation or division: that which
distinguishes or gives distinction: difference: eminence: characteristic
dignity and elegance of style: honourable treatment.

DISTINGUISH, dis-ting'gwish, _v.t._ to mark off, set apart (often with
_from_): to recognise by characteristic qualities: to discern critically:
to separate by a mark of honour: to make eminent or known.--_v.i._ to make
or show distinctions or differences, to recognise the difference (with
_from_, _between_).--_adj._ DISTING'UISHABLE, that may be capable of being
distinguished.--_adv._ DISTING'UISHABLY.--_p.adj._ DISTING'UISHED,
illustrious.--_n._ DISTING'UISHER.--_p.adj._ DISTING'UISHING,
peculiar.--_n._ DISTING'UISHMENT (_Shak._), distinction. [Through Fr. from
L. _distingu[)e]re_, _distinctum_--_dis_, asunder, _stingu[)e]re_, to
prick, conn. with Gr. _stizein_, to mark. See STING.]

DISTOMA, dis't[=o]-ma, _n._ the genus of trematode worms to which the
liver-fluke belongs. [Gr. _distomos_, two-mouthed--_dis_, and _stoma_, the
mouth.]

DISTORT, dis-tort', _v.t._ to turn a different way: to force out of the
natural or regular shape or direction: to turn aside from the true meaning:
to pervert: to misrepresent.--_p.adj._ DISTORT'ED.--_n._ DISTOR'TION, a
twisting out of regular shape: crookedness: perversion.--_adj._
DISTORT'IVE, causing distortion. [L. _dis_, asunder, _torqu[=e]re_,
_tortum_, to twist.]

DISTRACT, dis-trakt', _v.t._ to draw in different directions--applied to
the mind or attention: to confuse: to harass: to render crazy: to
divert.--_adj._ DISTRACT'ED.--_adv._ DISTRACT'EDLY.--_n._
DISTRACT'EDNESS.--_adjs._ DISTRACT'IBLE; DISTRACT'ILE (_bot._), carried
widely apart.--_n._ DISTRAC'TION, state of being distracted: perplexity:
agitation: madness: a diversion.--_adj._ DISTRACT'IVE, causing perplexity.

DISTRAIN, dis-tr[=a]n', _v.t._ to seize, esp. goods for debt, esp. for
non-payment of rent or rates.--_v.i._ to seize the goods of a
debtor.--_adj._ DISTRAIN'ABLE.--_ns._ DISTRAIN'MENT; DISTRAIN'OR,
DISTRAIN'ER; DISTRAINT', seizure of goods. [O. Fr. _destraindre_--L. _dis_,
asunder, _string[)e]re_, to draw tight.]

DISTRAIT, dis'tr[=a], _adj._ absent-minded. [Fr.]

DISTRAUGHT, dis-trawt', _adj._ distracted: perplexed. [See DISTRACT.]

DISTRESS, dis-tres', _n._ extreme pain: that which causes suffering:
calamity: misfortune: (_arch._) compulsion: act of distraining
goods.--_v.t._ to afflict with pain or suffering: to harass: to grieve: to
distrain.--_p.adj._ DISTRESSED'.--_adj._ DISTRESS'FUL.--_adv._
DISTRESS'FULLY.--_n._ DISTRESS'FULNESS.--_p.adj._ DISTRESS'ING.--_adv._
DISTRESS'INGLY. [O. Fr. _destresse_--L. _distring[)e]re_, _districtum_, to
pull asunder.]

DISTRIBUTE, dis-trib'[=u]t, _v.t._ to divide amongst several: to deal out
or allot: to classify: to give a logical term its fullest extension.--_n._
DISTRIB'UEND, that which is to be distributed.--_adjs._ DISTRIB'UTABLE,
that may be divided; DISTRIB'UTARY, distributing.--_ns._ DISTRIB'UTER, -OR;
DISTRIB[=U]'TION, allotment: classification: the application of a general
term to all the objects denoted by it.--_adjs._ DISTRIB[=U]'TIONAL;
DISTRIB'UTIVE, that distributes, separates, or divides: giving to each his
own.--_n._ a word, like _each_ or _every_, that indicates the several
individuals of a number.--_adv._ DISTRIB'UTIVELY.--GEOGRAPHICAL
DISTRIBUTION, the department of science that treats of the distribution of
animals and plants over certain areas of the globe. [L.
_distribu[)e]re_--_dis_, asunder, _tribu[)e]re_, _trib[=u]tum_, to allot.]

DISTRICT, dis'trikt, _n._ a portion of territory defined for political,
judicial, educational, or other purposes (as a registration district, a
militia district, the District of Columbia): a region.--_v.t._ to divide
into districts. [Fr.,--L. _districtus_--_distring[)e]re_, to draw tight.]

DISTRINGAS, dis-tring'gas, _n._ an old writ directing a sheriff or other
officer to distrain. [Second pers. sing. pres. subj. of Late L.
_distring[)e]re_, to distrain.]

DISTROUBLE, dis-trub'l, _v.t._ (_Spens._) to trouble greatly, to perplex.
[L. _dis_, inten., and _trouble_.]

DISTRUST, dis-trust', _n._ want of trust: want of faith or confidence:
doubt.--_v.t._ to have no trust in: to disbelieve: to doubt.--_adj._
DISTRUST'FUL, full of distrust: apt to distrust: suspicious.--_adv._
DISTRUST'FULLY.--_n._ DISTRUST'FULNESS.--_adj._ DISTRUST'LESS.

DISTUNE, dis-t[=u]n', _v.t._ to put out of tune.

DISTURB, dis-turb', _v.t._ to throw into confusion: to agitate: to
disquiet: to interrupt.--_n._ DISTURB'ANCE, agitation: tumult:
interruption: perplexity.--_adj._ and _n._ DISTURB'ANT,
disturbing.--_adjs._ DISTURB'ATIVE; DISTURBED'.--_n._ DISTURB'ER. [O. Fr.
_distourber_--L. _disturb[=a]re_, _dis_, asunder, _turb[=a]re_, to
agitate--_turba_, a crowd.]

DISTYLE, dis'til, _n._ a portico with two columns. [Gr. _distylos_--_di-_,
two, and _stylos_, column.]

DISULPHATE, d[=i]-sul'f[=a]t, _n._ a sulphate containing one atom of
hydrogen replaceable by a base.--_n._ DISUL'PHIDE, a sulphide containing
two atoms of sulphur to the molecule--also DISUL'PHURET.--_adj._
DISULPH[=U]'RIC, containing two sulphuric-acid radicals.

DISUNIFORM, dis-[=u]'ni-form, _adj._ not uniform.--_n._ DISUNIFORM'ITY.

DISUNION, dis-[=u]n'yun, _n._ want of union: breaking up of union or
concord: separation.--_n._ DISUN'IONIST, promoter of disunion.

DISUNITE, dis-[=u]-n[=i]t', _v.t._ to separate what is united: to sever or
sunder.--_v.i._ to fall asunder: to part.--_n._ DIS[=U]'NITY, state of
disunion.

DISUSE, dis-[=u]s', or dis'[=u]s, _n._ cessation or giving up of use or
custom.--_v.t._ (dis-[=u]z') to cease to use or practise.--_n._ DISUSAGE
(dis-[=u]z'-), gradual cessation of use or custom.

DISVALUE, dis-val'[=u], _v.t._ (_Shak._) to diminish in value, disparage.

DISVOUCH, dis-vowch', _v.t._ (_Shak._) to discredit, contradict.

DISWARREN, dis-wor'en, _v.t._ to deprive of the character of a warren.

DISWEAPON, dis-wep'un, _v.t._ to disarm.

DISYLLABLE. See DISSYLLABLE.

DISYOKE, dis-y[=o]k', _v.t._ (_Tenn._) to free from the yoke.

DIT, dit, _n._ (_Spens._) a ditty. [See DITTY.]

DITAL, dit'al, _n._ a digital key for raising the pitch of a guitar a
semitone. [It.,--L. _digitus_, a finger.]

DITCH, dich, _n._ a trench dug in the ground: any long narrow receptacle
for water.--_v.i._ to make a ditch or ditches.--_v.t._ to dig a ditch in or
around: to drain by ditches.--_ns._ DITCH'-DOG (_Shak._), a dead dog
rotting in a ditch; DITCH'ER, a ditch-maker. [A corr. of _dike_.]

DITE, d[=i]t, _v.t._ (_Spens._). Same as DIGHT.

DITETRAGONAL, d[=i]-tet-rag'o-nal, _adj._ twice tetragonal.

DITETRAHEDRAL, d[=i]-tet-ra-h[=e]'dral, _adj._ twice tetrahedral.

DITHEISM, d[=i]'th[=e]-izm, _n._ the doctrine of the existence of two
supreme gods.--_n._ D[=I]'THEIST.--_adjs._ DITHEIST'IC, -AL. [Gr. _di-_,
two, and _theos_, a god.]

DITHYRAMB, dith'i-ram, _n._ an ancient Greek hymn sung in honour of
Bacchus: a short poem of a like character.--_adj._ DITHYRAM'BIC, of or like
a dithyramb: enthusiastic: wild and boisterous. [L.,--Gr. _dithyrambos_, a
hymn in honour of Bacchus.]

DITOKOUS, dit'[=o]-kus, _adj._ producing two at a birth. [Gr. _di-_, two,
_tiktein_, to bring forth.]

DITONE, d[=i]'t[=o]n, _n._ an interval containing two tones, a major third.

DITRICHOTOMOUS, d[=i]-tri-kot'[=o]-mus, _adj._ divided into twos and
threes.

DITRIGLYPH, d[=i]-tr[=i]'glif, _n._ a space for two triglyphs in the
entablature between columns.--_adj._ DITRIGLYPH'IC.

DITROCHEE, d[=i]-tr[=o]'k[=e], _n._ a trochaic dipody.--_adj._
DITR[=O]'CHEAN.

DITTANDER, di-tan'd[.e]r, _n._ pepperwort: dittany.

DITTANY, dit'a-ni, _n._ a genus of aromatic perennial plants, formerly much
used medicinally as a tonic. [O. Fr. _dictame_--L. _dictamnus_--Gr.
_diktamnos_; prob. from Mt. _Dikt[=e]_ in Crete.]

DITTAY, dit'[=a], _n._ (_Scots law_) an indictment, charge. [O. Fr.
_ditté_--L. _dict[=a]tum_. Cf. DITTY, DICTATE.]

DITTIED, dit'id, _adj._ (_Milt._) sung, as a ditty.

DITTO, dit'[=o], contracted DO., _n._ that which has been said: the same
thing.--_adv._ as before, or aforesaid: in like manner.--_n.pl._ DITT'OS, a
suit of clothes of the same colour throughout. [It. _ditto_--L. _dictum_,
said, pa.p. of _dic[)e]re_, to say.]

DITTOGRAPHY, di-tog'ra-fi, _n._ mechanical repetition of letters or words
in copying a manuscript. [Gr. _dittos_, double, _graphein_, to write.]

DITTOLOGY, di-tol'o-ji, _n._ a double reading. [Gr. _dittologia_--_dittos_,
double, _graphein_, to write.]

DITTY, dit'i, _n._ a song: a little poem to be sung. [O. Fr. _ditie_--L.
_dict[=a]tum_, neut. of _dict[=a]tus_, perf. part. of _dict[=a]re_, to
dictate.]

DITTY-BAG, dit'i-bag, _n._ a sailor's bag for needles, thread, &c.--Also
DITT'Y-BOX.

DIURETIC, d[=i]-[=u]-ret'ik, _adj._ promoting the discharge of urine.--_n._
a medicine causing this discharge.--_n._ DIUR[=E]'SIS, the excessive
discharge of urine. [Fr.,--Gr. _diour[=e]tikos_--_dia_, through, _ouron_,
urine.]

DIURNAL, d[=i]-ur'nal, _adj._ daily: relating to or performed in a
day.--_n._ a service-book containing the day hours, except matins (a
night-office): a diary, journal.--_n._ DIUR'NALIST, a journalist.--_adv._
DIUR'NALLY. [L. _diurn[=a]lis_--_dies_, a day. See JOURNAL.]

DIUTURNAL, d[=i]-[=u]-tur'nal, _adj._ lasting long.--_n._ DIUTUR'NITY.

DIV, d[=i]v, _n._ an evil spirit of Persian mythology.

DIVA, d[=i]'va, _n._ a popular female singer: a prima-donna. [It.,--L.
_diva_, fem. of _divus_, divine.]

DIVAGATION, d[=i]-va-g[=a]'shun, _n._ a digression, deviation.--_v.i._
D[=I]'VAGATE, to wander about.--_adv._ DIVAGUE'LY. [L. _divag[=a]ri_, to
wander.]

DIVAN, di-van', _n._ the Turkish council of state: a court of justice: used
poetically of any council or assembly: a council-chamber with cushioned
seats: a sofa: a smoking-room: a collection of poems. [Ar. and Pers.
_díwán_, a long seat.]

DIVARICATE, d[=i]-var'i-k[=a]t, _v.i._ to part into two branches, to fork:
to diverge.--_v.t._ to divide into two branches.--_adj._ widely divergent,
spreading apart.--_n._ DIVARIC[=A]'TION. [L. _divaric[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_dis_, asunder, _varic[=a]re_, to spread the legs--_varus_,
bent apart.]

DIVE, d[=i]v, _v.i._ to dip or plunge into water: to go headlong into a
recess, forest, &c.: to plunge or go deeply into any matter.--_n._ a plunge
into water: a swoop.--_n._ DIV'ER, one who dives: a pearl-diver: one who
works from a diving-bell or in a diving-dress beneath water: a bird expert
at diving--specifically, the genus diver or loon of northern seas--loosely,
auks, grebes, penguins, &c.: (_slang_) a pickpocket. [A.S. _dýfan_,
_dúfan_; Ice. _dýfa_. See DIP.]

DIVELLENT, d[=i]-vel'ent, _adj._ drawing asunder.

DIVELLICATE, d[=i]-vel'i-k[=a]t, _v.t._ to pull in pieces.

DIVERGE, di-v[.e]rj', _v.i._ to incline or turn apart: to tend from a
common point in different directions: to vary from the standard.--_ns._
DIVERGE'MENT; DIVERG'ENCE, DIVERG'ENCY, a tendency to recede from one
point.--_adj._ DIVERG'ENT.--_adv._ DIVERG'INGLY. [L. _dis_, asunder,
_verg[)e]re_, to incline.]

DIVERS, d[=i]'v[.e]rz, _adj._ sundry: several: more than one: (_B._) same
as DIVERSE. [See DIVERT.]

DIVERSE, d[=i]'v[.e]rs, or div-[.e]rs', _adj._ different: unlike:
multiform: various.--_adv._ D[=I]'VERSELY, or DIVERSE'LY.

DIVERSIFY, di-v[.e]r'si-f[=i], _v.t._ to make diverse or different: to give
variety to:--_pr.p._ diver'sifying; _pa.p._ diver'sified.--_adj._
DIVERSIF[=I]'ABLE.--_n._ DIVERSIFIC[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DIVER'SIFORM, of
diverse or various forms. [Fr.,--Low L. _diversific[=a]re_--_diversus_,
diverse, _fac[)e]re_, to make.]

DIVERSION, di-v[.e]r'shun, _n._ act of diverting or turning aside: that
which diverts: amusement, recreation: something done to turn the attention
of an enemy from the principal point of attack.

DIVERSITY, di-v[.e]r'si-ti, _n._ state of being diverse: difference:
unlikeness: variety.

DIVERT, di-v[.e]rt', _v.t._ to turn aside: to change the direction of: to
turn the mind from business or study: to amuse.--_n._ DIVERT'IMENTO
(_obs._), diversion: (_mus._) a ballet-interlude.--_adj._
DIVERT'ING.--_adv._ DIVERT'INGLY.--_n._ DIVERT'ISEMENT, diversion: a short
ballet between the acts of a play.--_adj._ DIVERT'IVE, tending to divert.
[Fr.,--L. _divert[)e]re_, _diversum_--_dis_, aside, _vert[)e]re_, to turn.]

DIVERTICLE, di-ver'ti-kl, _n._ (_anat._) a diverticulum, cæcum, or blind
tubular process.--_adjs._ DIVERTIC'ULAR, DIVERTIC'ULATED.

DIVES, d[=i]'v[=e]s (L. 'the rich man'), _n._ a name used as if a proper
name for the rich man at whose gate Lazarus lay (Luke, xvi. 19): a rich and
luxurious person.--_n._ DIV'ITISM, condition of being rich.

DIVEST, di-vest', _v.t._ to strip or deprive of anything.--_adj._
DIVEST'IBLE.--_ns._ DIVEST'ITURE, DIVEST'MENT (_rare_). [L.
_devest[=i]re_--_dis_, neg., _vest[=i]re_, to clothe--_vestis_, a garment.]

DIVIDE, di-v[=i]d', _v.t._ to part asunder: to part among, to allot, &c.:
to set at variance: to separate into two parts (as in voting).--_v.i._ to
part or open: to break friendship: to vote by separating into two
bodies.--_n._ (_coll._) the act of dividing: (esp. in _U.S._) a
watershed.--_adj._ DIVID'ABLE (_rare_), divisible: (_Shak._)
divided.--_adv._ DIVID'EDLY.--_n._ DIVID'ER, that which divides: a kind of
compasses for dividing lines, &c.--_adj._ DIVID'ING, separating.--_n._
separation.--_n._ DIVID'ING-EN'GINE, an instrument for graduating the
scales of scientific apparatus.--_adjs._ DIVID'UAL (_Milt._), shared in
common with others; DIVID'UOUS, special, accidental. [L. _divid[)e]re_,
_divisum_--_dis_, asunder, root _vid_, to separate.]

DIVIDEND, div'i-dend, _n._ that which is to be divided: the share of a sum
divided that falls to each individual, by way of interest or
otherwise.--DECLARE A DIVIDEND, to announce the sum per cent. a trading
concern is prepared to pay its shareholders. [L.
_dividendum_--_divid[)e]re_.]

DIVIDIVI, div'i-div-i, _n._ the curved pods of the leguminous tree,
_Cæsalpinia coriaria_, imported for tanning and dyeing. [Native name.]

DIVINE, di-v[=i]n', _adj._ belonging to or proceeding from God: devoted to
God's service: holy: sacred: excellent in the highest degree.--_n._ one
skilled in divine things: a minister of the gospel: a theologian.--_v.t._
to foresee or foretell as if divinely inspired: to guess or make
out.--_v.i._ to profess or practise divination: to have forebodings.--_ns._
DIVIN[=A]'TION, the act or practice of divining: instinctive prevision:
prediction: conjecture; DIV'IN[=A]TOR, DIV[=I]N'ER, one who divines or
professes divination: a conjecturer:--_fem._ DIVIN'ERESS.--_adjs._
DIVINAT[=O]'RIAL, DIVIN'A-TORY, relating to divination,
conjectural.--_adv._ DIVINE'LY.--_ns._ DIVINE'NESS; DIVIN'ING-ROD, a rod,
usually of hazel, used by those professing to discover water or metals
under ground.--_vs.t._ DIV'INISE, DIVIN'IFY, to treat as divine. [Fr.,--L.
_divinus_, from _divus_, _deus_, a god.]

DIVING, d[=i]v'ing, _n._ the action of the verb _to dive_.--_adj._ that
dives.

[Illustration]

DIVING-BELL, d[=i]v'ing-bel, _n._ a hollow vessel or chamber, originally
bell-shaped, open at the bottom and supplied with air by a tube from above,
in which one may descend into and work under water.--_n._ DIV'ING-DRESS,
the water-tight costume of a diver, with special provision for receiving
air, &c. [See DIVE.]

DIVINITY, di-vin'i-ti, _n._ godhead: the nature or essence of God: God: a
celestial being: any god: the science of divine things: theology.--DIVINITY
HALL (_Scot._), a theological college, or the theological department in a
university. [See DIVINE.]

DIVISION, di-vizh'un, _n._ act of dividing: state of being divided: that
which divides: a partition: a barrier: the portion divided or separated:
part of an army or military force: separation: difference in opinion, &c.:
disunion: (_arith._) the rule or process of finding how many times one
number is contained in another.--_n._ DIVISIBIL'ITY.--_adj._ DIVIS'IBLE,
capable of being divided or separated.--_adv._ DIVIS'IBLY.--_adjs._
DIVI'SIONAL, DIVI'SIONARY, pertaining to or marking a division or
separation; DIV[=I]S'IVE, forming division or separation: creating
discord.--_ns._ DIV[=I]S'IVENESS; DIVIS'OR (_arith._), the number which
divides the dividend.

DIVORCE, di-vors', _n._ the legal separation of husband and wife: the
sentence by which a marriage is dissolved.--_v.t._ to separate: to sunder:
to dissolve the marriage-contract of: to put away.--_adj._
DIVORCE'ABLE.--_ns._ DIVORCEE', a divorced person; DIVORCE'MENT (_B._),
divorce; DIVOR'CER.--_adj._ DIVOR'CIVE, having power to divorce. [Fr.,--L.
_divortium_--_divort[)e]re_, another form of _divert[)e]re_. See DIVERT.]

DIVOT, div'ot, _n._ (_Scot._) a piece of turf.--FEAL AND DIVOT (_Scots
law_), a right of cutting sods and turfs for certain purposes. [Origin
unknown.]

DIVOTO, d[=e]-v[=o]'t[=o], _adj._ (_mus._) devout, solemn. [It.]

DIVULGE, di-vulj', _v.t._ to spread abroad among the vulgar or the people:
to make public: to reveal.--_v.t._ DIVUL'GATE, to publish.--_n._
DIVULG[=A]'TION. [Fr.,--L. _divulg[=a]re_--_dis_, among, _vulg[=a]re_,
_vulgus_, the common people. See FOLK.]

DIVULSION, di-vul'shun, _n._ act of pulling or rending asunder or
away.--_adj._ DIVUL'SIVE, tending to pull asunder. [L. _divulsion-em_,
_divell[)e]re_, _divulsum_--_dis_, asunder, _vell[)e]re_, _vulsum_, to
pull.]

DIZAIN, di-z[=a]n', _n._ a poem in ten stanzas. [Fr.,--_dix_, ten--L.
_decem_, ten. Cf. DOZEN.]

DIZEN, d[=i]'zn, or diz'n, _v.t._ to dress gaudily: (_obs._) to dress: to
deck. [From an Eng. form found also in Low Ger. _diesse_, the bunch of flax
on the distaff.]

DIZZARD, diz'ard, _n._ a blockhead.

DIZZY, diz'i, _adj._ giddy: confused: causing giddiness.--_v.t._ to make
dizzy: to confuse.--_adv._ DIZZ'ILY.--_n._ DIZZ'INESS, giddiness.--_p.adj._
DIZZ'YING, making dizzy. [A.S. _dysig_, foolish, allied to _dwaes_, stupid;
cf. Dan. _dösig_; drowsy; also DAZE, DOZE.]

DJEREED. See JEREED.

DO, d[=oo], _v.t._ to perform any action: to bring about or effect: to
accomplish or finish: to prepare: to put or bring into any form or state:
to cheat, swindle.--_v.i._ to act or behave:--_pr.p._ do'ing; _pa.t._ did;
_pa.p._ done (dun).--In 'Do come,' 'I do love him,' _Do_ is intensive; _Do_
serves as substitute for other verbs to save repeating them (as in 'I
didn't mean to speak, but if I do,' &c.).--_n._ endeavour, duty: a trick,
hoax.--_n._ DO'-ALL, a factotum.--_p.adj._ DO'ING, active (as in 'Up and
doing').--DO AWAY WITH, to abolish, destroy; DO BROWN, to cook or roast to
brownness: (_slang_) to make a fool of; DO FOR, to suit: to provide for: to
ruin: (_vulg._) to kill; DO INTO, to translate; DO MACBETH, &c., to
represent that part in a play; DO ONE PROUD (_coll._), to make one feel
flattered; DO OVER, to do again: to cover over, as with paint; DO THE CITY,
to visit the sights of the city; DO TO DEATH, to murder; DO UP, put up,
make tidy, arrange, tie up, dress (linen): to utterly fatigue; DO WELL (to
be angry), to be justified in being angry, &c.: to prosper; DO WITH, to
make use of: to meddle with: to get on with; DO WITHOUT, not to be
dependent on, to dispense with.--BE DONE FOR, to be defeated or
ruined.--HAVE DONE, desist; HAVE DONE WITH, to cease interest in; HAVE TO
DO WITH, to have a connection with.--WHAT'S TO DO? what is the matter?
[A.S. _dón_, _dyde_, _gedón_; Dut. _doen_, Ger. _thun_; conn. with Gr.
_tithenai_, to put, place.]

DO, d[=oo], _v.i._ to fare or get on, as to health: to succeed: to suffice:
to suit or avail (cf. 'This will do,' 'This will never do,' 'This will do
for me well enough'). [Prov. Eng. _dow_, to avail, to be worth; from A.S.
_dugan_, to be worth; Ger. _taugen_, to be strong, to be worth. See
DOUGHTY.]

DO, d[=o], _n._ the syllable or name for the first tone or keynote of the
musical scale--the others being _re_, _mi_, _fa_, _sol_, _la_, _ti_,
initial syllables of lines in an old Latin hymn in honour of John the
Baptist.

DO, d[=oo], _n._ same as ADO: (_slang_) a swindle.

DOAB, do'äb, _n._ in India, land between two rivers. [Hind. _do[=a]b_,
_du[=a]b_.]

DOABLE, d[=oo]'a-bl, _adj._ (_rare_) that can be done.

DOAT, d[=o]t, _v.i._ same as DOTE.--_n._ DOAT'ING-PIECE, darling.

DOBBIN, dob'bin, _n._ a workhorse. [Fr. _Dobbin_, a form like _Robin_ for
_Robert_. Cf. DICKY, JACKASS.]

DOBBY, DOBBIE, dob'i, _n._ a dotard: a brownie: an attachment to a loom for
weaving small figures.

DOBCHICK, dob'chik, _n._ Same as DABCHICK.

DOBHASH, d[=o]'bash, _n._ an interpreter. [Hind. _dobhash[=i]_.]

DOCENT. See PRIVAT DOCENT.

DOCETISM, do-s[=e]'tizm, _n._ a 2d-century heresy, which denied the human
nature of Christ, affirming that His body was only a semblance.--_n.pl._
DOC[=E]'TÆ.--_adjs._ DOC[=E]'TIC, DOCETIS'TIC.--_ns._ DOC[=E]'TISM;
DOC[=E]'TIST. [Gr. _dok[=e]tai_, those of this belief--_dokein_, to seem.]

DOCH-AN-DORIS, doch'an-d[=o]'ris, _n._ a stirrup-cup, a parting-cup.--Also
DOCH-AN-DORACH, DEUCH-AN-DORIS. [Gael., _deoch_, drink, _an_, the,
_doruis_, gen. of _dorus_, door.]

DOCILE, d[=o]'s[=i]l, or dos'il, _adj._ teachable: ready to learn: easily
managed--(_obs._) DOC'IBLE.--_ns._ DOC'IBLENESS, DOCIL'ITY,
teachableness.--_adj._ D[=O]'CIOUS (_U.S._).--_n._ DOC'ITY. [Fr.,--L.
_docilis_--_doc[=e]re_, to teach.]

DOCIMASY, dos'i-ma-si, _n._ the art by which the nature and proportions of
an ore are determined: assaying: examination of poisons.--_n._ DOCIMAS'TES,
a genus of humming-birds with enormously long beak.--_adj._
DOCIMAS'TIC--_n._ DOCIMOL'OGY, a treatise on the art of assaying. [Gr.
_dokimasia_, examination--_dokimazein_, to test--_dechesthai_, to take,
approve.]

DOCK, dok, _n._ a troublesome weed with large leaves and a long root.--_n._
DOCK'-CRESS, the nipplewort. [A.S. _docce_; perh. from Gael. _dogha_, a
burdock.]

DOCK, dok, _v.t._ to cut short: to curtail: to cut off: to clip.--_n._ the
part of a tail left after clipping. [Prob. W. _tocio_, to cut short; or Old
Ice. _dockr_, a stumpy tail.]

DOCK, dok, _n._ an enclosure or artificial basin near a harbour or river,
for the reception of vessels: the box in court where the accused stands: in
a railway station, the place of arrival and departure of a train.--_v.t._
to place in a dock.--_ns._ DOCK'AGE, accommodation in docks for ships:
dock-dues; DOCK'ER, one who works in the docks; DOCK'-MAS'TER, the person
superintending a dock; DOCK'-WARR'ANT, a warehouse receipt; DOCK'YARD, a
naval establishment with docks, building-slips, stores, &c.; DRY'-DOCK, a
dock which can be laid dry by dock-gates, pumping, &c.--also called
GRAV'ING-DOCK, because suitable for cleaning or graving the sides and
bottoms of ships; FLOAT'ING-DOCK, a dock which floats in the water, but can
by pumping out its hollow sides be raised high in the water with any ship
that has been floated into it, and then emptied of water by further
pumping; WET'-DOCK, a dock maintaining a level nearly uniform with that of
high water. [Old Dut. _dokke_; perh. from Low L. _doga_, a canal--Gr.
_doch[=e]_, a receptacle--_dechesthai_, to receive.]

DOCKET, dok'et, _n._ a summary of a larger writing: a bill or ticket
affixed to anything: a label: a list or register of cases in court.--_v.t._
to make a summary of the heads of a writing: to enter in a book: to mark
the contents of papers on the back:--_pr.p._ dock'eting; _pa.p._ dock'eted.
[Dim. of _dock_, to curtail; sometimes _docquet_, as if French.]

DOCTOR, dok'tur, _n._ one who has received from a university the highest
degree in a faculty: a physician: a medical practitioner: a cleric
especially skilled in theology or ecclesiastical law.--_v.t._ to treat as a
doctor does: to adulterate: to make alterations on: to falsify: to address
as doctor: to create a doctor.--_v.i._ to take physic: to practise
medicine.--_adj._ DOC'TORAL.--_ns._ DOC'TORATE, DOC'TORSHIP; DOC'TORESS,
DOC'TRESS, a female physician.--DOCTORS' COMMONS, before the establishment
of the Divorce Court and Probate Court in 1857, the college of the doctors
of civil law in London, incorporated by royal charter in 1768; DOCTOR'S
STUFF, medicine. [L., 'a teacher'--_docere_, to teach.]

DOCTRINAIRE, doc'tri-n[=a]r, _n._ an unpractical theorist, disposed to
carry principles to logical but unworkable extremes: in France, in 1815-30,
one of a school who desired a constitution like that of Britain.--_adj._
theorist.--_ns._ DOCTRIN[=A]'RIAN, one given to theory;
DOCTRIN[=A]'RIANISM, blind adhesion to one-sided principles. [Fr.,--Late L.
_doctrinarius_.]

DOCTRINE, dok'trin, _n._ a thing taught: a principle of belief: what the
Scriptures teach on any subject: (_B._) act or manner of teaching.--_adj._
DOC'TRINAL, relating to or containing doctrine: relating to the act of
teaching.--_adv._ DOC'TRINALLY. [Fr.,--L. _doctr[=i]na_, _doc[=e]re_, to
teach.]

DOCUMENT, dok'[=u]-ment, _n._ a paper containing information or the proof
of anything.--_v.t._ to furnish with documents: to support or prove by
documents.--_adjs._ DOCUMENT'AL, DOCUMENT'ARY, relating to or found in
documents.--_n._ DOCUMENT[=A]'TION, preparation or use of documentary
evidence and authorities--used in realistic fiction by the school of Zola
of faithful reproduction of the records, real or supposed, of actual lives
(the so-called _document humain_).--DOCUMENTARY HYPOTHESIS, the hypothesis
that the Pentateuch consists of two or more originally distinct documents.
[Fr.,--L. _documentum_--_doc[=e]re_, to teach.]

DOD, dod, _v.t._ (_prov._) to clip, poll, lop.--_p.adj._ DOD'DED, polled,
hornless.--_ns._ DOD'DLE, a pollard; DOD'DY, a cow without horns.

DODDART, dod'art, _n._ (_obs._) hockey.

DODDER, dod'[.e]r, _n._ a leafless, twining, pale-coloured parasitic
plant.--_p.adj._ DODD'ERED, overgrown with dodder. [A.S. _dodder_; Ger.
_dotter_.]

DODDER, dod'[.e]r, _v.t._ or _v.i._ to shake, tremble.--_p.adj._
DODD'ERING, trembling: pottering. [Cf. TODDLE.]

DODDY, dod'i, _adj._ (_Scot._) crabbed.

DODECAGON, d[=o]-dek'a-gon, _n._ a plane figure having twelve equal angles
and sides. [Gr. _d[=o]deka_, twelve, _g[=o]nia_, an angle.]

DODECAGYNIA, d[=o]-dek-a-jin'i-a, _n._ a Linnæan order of plants having
twelve styles.--_adjs._ DODECAGYN'IAN, DODECAG'YNOUS.

[Illustration]

DODECAHEDRON, d[=o]-dek-a-h[=e]'dron, _n._ a solid figure, having twelve
equal pentagonal bases or faces.--_adj._ DODECAH[=E]'DRAL. [Gr.
_d[=o]deka_, twelve, _hedra_, a base, a side.]

DODECANDRIA, d[=o]-de-kan'dri-a, _n._ a Linnæan class of plants having
twelve stamens.--_adj._ DODECAN'DROUS. [Gr. _d[=o]deka_, twelve, _an[=e]r_,
_andros_, a man.]

DODECAPETALOUS, d[=o]-dek-a-pet'a-lus, _adj._ having twelve petals. [Gr.
_d[=o]deka_, twelve, _petalon_, a petal.]

DODECASTYLE, d[=o]'dek-a-st[=i]l, _adj._ (_archit._) having twelve columns
in front.--_n._ a portico with such.

DODECASYLLABLE, d[=o]-dek-a-sil'a-bl, _n._ a word of twelve
syllables.--_adj._ DODECASYLLAB'IC.

DODGE, doj, _v.i._ to start aside or shift about: to evade or use mean
tricks: to shuffle or quibble.--_v.t._ to evade by a sudden shift of place:
to trick.--_n._ an evasion: a trick: a quibble.--_ns._ DODG'ER; DODG'ERY,
trickery.--_adj._ DODG'Y. [Cf. _dodder_, _toddle_, _diddle_; Scot.
_daddle_, _doddle_.]

DODIPOLL, DODDYPOLL, dod'i-p[=o]l, _n._ a blockhead.

DODKIN, dod'kin, _n._ a doit.--Also DOIT'KIN.

DODMAN, dod'man, _n._ (_prov._) a snail.

DODO, d[=o]'d[=o], _n._ a large clumsy bird, about the size of a turkey,
and without the power of flight--it was once found in Mauritius and
Madagascar, but became extinct about the end of the 17th century. [Port.
_doudo_, silly.]

DODONÆAN, d[=o]-d[=o]-n[=e]'an, _adj._ pertaining to _Dodona_ in Epirus, or
its oracle sacred to Zeus, situated in a grove of oaks.--Also DOD[=O]'NIAN.

DOE, d[=o], _n._ John Doe and Richard Roe, names of an imaginary plaintiff
and opponent in the old legal action for ejectment, and proverbial term for
a legal action.

DOE, d[=o], _n._ the female of the fallow-deer or buck.--_n._ DOE'SKIN, the
skin of a doe: a smooth, close-woven woollen cloth. [A.S. _dá_; Dan. _daa_,
a deer.]

DOER, d[=oo]'[.e]r, _n._ one who does anything; one who habitually
performs: an agent.

DOES, duz, 3d pers. sing. pres. indic. of DO.

DOFF, dof, _v.t._ to do or take off: to rid one's self of. [A contr. of _do
off_.]

DOFFER, dof'[.e]r, _n._ the part of a carding-machine which strips the
cotton from the cylinder when carded.

DOG, dog, _n._ a domestic quadruped of the same genus as the wolf, and akin
to the fox, varying in size from small terriers to huge Newfoundlands,
mastiffs, and St Bernards: a mean scoundrel: a term of contempt: a fellow
(as a jolly dog): one of two constellations of stars: an andiron: an iron
hook for holding logs of wood: a dogfish: a cock, as of a gun.--_adj._ male
(opposed to bitch), as in dog-fox, dog-ape.--_v.t._ to follow as a dog: to
follow and watch constantly: to worry with importunity:--_pr.p._ dog'ging;
_pa.p._ dogged.--_ns._ DOG'-BANE, a plant with an intensely bitter root,
valued for its medicinal properties, said to be poisonous to dogs;
DOG'-BEE, a drone; DOG'-BELT, a broad leather belt round the waist for
drawing dans or sledges in the low workings of coal-mines; DOG'-BIS'CUIT,
biscuit made for dogs, sometimes containing scraps of meat; DOG'-BOLT
(_obs._), a contemptible fellow; DOG'-BOX, the part of a railway wagon in
which dogs are carried; DOG'-BR[=I]'ER, the brier dogrose; DOG'CART, a
two-wheeled carriage with seats back to back, so called from sporting-dogs
being originally carried inside the box.--_adj._ DOG'-CHEAP, very
cheap.--_n._ DOG'-COLL'AR, a collar for dogs: a kind of stiff collar on a
woman's dress: a close-fitting clerical collar.--_adj._ DOG'-FACED.--_ns._
DOG'-FAN'CIER, one who has a fancy for, or who deals in dogs; DOG'FISH, a
popular name for various small species of shark, common on British and
American coasts; DOG'-FOX, a male fox; DOG'GER.--_adj._ DOG'GISH, like a
dog: churlish: brutal.--_adv._ DOG'GISHLY.--_n._ DOG'GISHNESS.--_p.adj._
DOG'GONED (_vulg._), confounded.--_n._ DOG'-GRASS, a coarse perennial grass
common in uncultivated grounds, akin to _couch-grass_, _dog-wheat_,
&c.--_adjs._ DOG'-HEAD'ED; DOG'-HEART'ED.--_ns._ DOG'-HOLE, a hole fit only
for dogs: a mean dwelling; DOG'-HOUSE, -KENN'EL; DOG'-LEECH, one who treats
the diseases of dogs; DOG-LETT'ER, the letter or sound _r_--also _Canine
letter_; DOG'-LOUSE; DOG'-PARS'LEY, fool's parsley; DOG'ROSE, a wild-rose,
a brier; DOG'S'-EAR, the corner of the leaf of a book turned down like a
dog's ear.--_v.t._ to turn down the corners of leaves.--_p.adjs._
DOG'S'-EARED, DOG'-EARED.--_ns._ DOG'S'-FENN'EL, May-weed; DOG'SHIP, the
quality or personality of a dog.--_adj._ DOG'-SICK.--_n._ DOG'SKIN, leather
made from the skin of a dog, or from sheepskin in imitation of it.--_adj._
made of such.--_ns._ DOG'-SLEEP, a light sleep broken by the slightest
noise; DOG'S'-MEAT, coarse meat, scraps and refuse sold as food for dogs;
DOG'S'-MER'CURY, the _mercurialis perennis_; DOG'S'-NOSE, a kind of mixed
drink; DOG'S'-TAIL-GRASS, a common British pasture grass.--_n.pl._
DOG'-STONES, a name for various British species of orchis.--_ns._
DOG'S'-TONGUE, the hound's-tongue plant, _Cynoglossum officinale_;
DOG'-TICK.--_adjs._ DOG'-TIRED, DOG'-WEA'RY (_Shak._), tired as a dog,
completely worn out.--_ns._ DOG'-TRICK, an ill-natured trick; DOG'-TROT, a
gentle trot like that of a dog; DOG'-VANE, a small vane of thread, cork,
and feathers placed on the weather gunwale to show the direction of the
wind; DOG'-V[=I]'OLET, the common name of _Viola canina_ and other
scentless species of wild violet; DOG'-WHEAT, a name of DOG-GRASS;
DOG'-WHELK, the popular name for univalve molluscs of the genus _Nassa_;
DOG'WOOD, a tree or shrub of the cornel genus, valuable on account of the
hardness of the wood.--_interj._ DOG ON IT! a minced oath (for God damn
it!).--GO TO THE DOGS, to be ruined; NOT TO LEAD THE LIFE OF A DOG, to lead
a life so wretched that even a dog would not be content with it; THROW,
GIVE, or SEND TO THE DOGS, to throw away or abandon. [M. E. _doggë_; not in
A.S.; Dut. _dog_, a mastiff; Ger. _dogge_, _docke_.]

DOGBERRY, dog'ber-ri, _n._ the fruit of a species of dogwood: a stupid,
obstinate fellow, from the old watchman in Shakespeare's _Much Ado about
Nothing_.

DOGDAYS, dog'd[=a]z, _n.pl._ the period when the dogstar rises and sets
with the sun (generally reckoned July 3d to August 11th)--erroneously
supposed to be the time when dogs are specially liable to hydrophobia.

DOGE, d[=o]j, _n._ formerly the chief-magistrate in Venice and
Genoa.--_ns._ DOGARESS'A, the wife of a doge; DOG'ATE, DOGE'ATE, DOGE'SHIP.
[It., prov. for _duce_ = Eng. _duke_--L. _dux_, a leader--_duc[)e]re_, to
lead.]

DOGGED, dog'ed, _adj._ surly like an angry dog: sullen: obstinate.--_adv._
(_slang_) very.--_adv._ DOGG'EDLY.--_n._ DOGG'EDNESS.

DOGGER, dog'[.e]r, _n._ a two-masted Dutch fishing-vessel.--_n._
DOGG'ERMAN. [Dut.]

DOGGER, dog'er, _n._ a sandy and oolitic ironstone.

DOGGEREL, dog'[.e]r-el, _n._ irregular measures in burlesque poetry, so
named in contempt: worthless verses.--_adj._ irregular in rhythm,
mean.--Also DOG'GREL. [Usually assumed to be from _dog_, but no good ground
for this.]

DOGGY, dog'i, _adj._ fond of dogs.

DOG-HEAD, dog'-hed, _n._ the hammer of a gun-lock.

DOG-LATIN, dog'-lat'in, _n._ barbarous or bad Latin. [See DOGGEREL.]

DOGMA, dog'ma, _n._ a settled opinion: a principle or tenet: a doctrine
laid down with authority.--_adjs._ DOGMAT'IC, -AL, pertaining to a dogma:
asserting a thing as if it were a dogma: asserting positively:
overbearing.--_adv._ DOGMAT'ICALLY.--_n._ DOGMAT'ICS (_theol._), the
statement of Christian doctrines, systematic theology.--_v.i._ DOG'MATISE,
to state one's opinion dogmatically or arrogantly.--_ns._ DOG'MATISER;
DOG'MATISM, dogmatic or positive assertion of opinion; DOG'MATIST, one who
makes positive assertions; DOGMATOL'OGY, the science of dogma.--_adj._
DOG'MATORY. [Gr., 'an opinion,' from _dokein_, to think, allied to L.
_decet_.]

DOG-SHORES, dog'-sh[=o]rz, _n.pl._ the pieces of timber used to shore up a
vessel, to keep it from falling or from starting during the preparations
for launching, knocked aside when the ship is ready to be launched.

DOGSTAR, dog'stär, _n._ Sirius, a star of the first magnitude, whose rising
and setting with the sun gave name to the dogdays.

[Illustration]

DOG-TOOTH, dog'-t[=oo]th, _n._ a moulding for doors and windows in later
Norman architecture, consisting of a series of ornamented conical
projections: a canine tooth.

DOG-WATCHES, dog'-woch'ez, _n.pl._ on shipboard, the two watches 4-6 P.M.
and 6-8 P.M., consisting each of two hours only, instead of four.

DOILT, doilt, _adj._ (_Scot._) crazy, foolish.--Also DOILED.

DOILY, doi'li, _n._ (_obs._) an old kind of woollen stuff: a small napkin
used at dessert. [From _Doily_ or _Doyley_, a famous haberdasher.]

DOINGS, d[=oo]'ingz, _n.pl._ things done, events: proceedings: behaviour.

DOIT, doit, _n._ a small Dutch coin worth about half a farthing: a thing of
little or no value. [Dut. _duit_.]

DOITED, doit'ed, _p.adj._ a Scotch form of DOTED.

DOKE, d[=o]k, _n._ (_prov._) a dimple, dint.

DOLABELLA, d[=o]-la-bel'a, _n._ a genus of tectibranchiate gasteropods.

DOLABRA, d[=o]-l[=a]'bra, _n._ an ancient Roman cutting or digging
implement, of various shapes.--_adj._ DOLAB'RIFORM, like a hatchet or
cleaver, used of leaves, also of shells straight and thick at one side, and
thin at the other. [L. _dolabra_, a cleaver.]

DOLCE, d[=o]l'che, _adj._ (_mus._) sweet.--_n._ a soft-toned
organ-stop.--_adv._ DOLCEMEN'TE (_mus._), softly and sweetly. [It.]

DOLDRUMS, dol'drumz, _n.pl._ (_naut._) those parts of the ocean about the
equator where calms and baffling winds prevail: low spirits. [Prob. conn.
with _dold_, stupid, or _dol_ = dull.]

DOLE, d[=o]l, _v.t._ to deal out in small portions.--_n._ a share
distributed: something given in charity: a small portion. [A doublet of
_deal_, to divide.]

DOLE, d[=o]l, _n._ pain: grief: (_arch._ and _poet._) heaviness at
heart.--_adj._ DOLE'FUL, full of dole or grief: melancholy.--_adv._
DOLE'FULLY.--_n._ DOLE'FULNESS.--_adjs._ D[=O]'LENT (_obs._), DOLE'SOME,
dismal.--_adv._ DOLE'SOMELY. [O. Fr. _doel_ (Fr. _deuil_), grief--L.
_dol[=e]re_, to feel pain.]

DOLERITE, dol'er-[=i]t, _n._ basaltic greenstone. [Fr.,--Gr. _doleros_,
deceptive, it being hard to distinguish from real greenstone.]

DOLICHOCEPHALIC, dol-i-ko-sef-al'ik, _adj._ long-headed, a term used to
denote a head whose diameter from front to back is longer than from side to
side--also DOLICHOCEPH'ALOUS.--_ns._ DOLICHOCEPH'ALY, DOLICHOCEPH'ALISM.
[Formed from Gr. _dolichos_, long, _kephal[=e]_, the head.]

DOLICHOS, dol'i-kos, _n._ a genus of leguminous plants allied to the
Haricot. [Gr., long.]

DOLICHOSAURUS, dol-i-k[=o]-saw'rus, _n._ the typical genus of
DOLICOSAU'RIA, a group of fossil _Lacertilia_ of the Cretaceous formation.

DOLICHOTIS, dol-i-k[=o]'tis, _n._ a genus of long-eared South American
rodents. [Gr. _dolichos_, long, _ous_, _[=o]tos_, the ear.]

DOLICHURUS, dol-i-k[=u]'rus, _n._ a dactylic hexameter with a redundant
syllable at the end, the sixth foot being a dactyl. [Gr., long-tailed.]

DOLIUM, d[=o]'li-um, _n._ a Roman earthenware jar for wine, oil, grain,
&c.:--_pl._ D[=O]'LIA. [L.]

DOLL, dol, _n._ a puppet or toy-baby for a child: a pretty but silly woman:
the smallest or pet pig in a litter.--_ns._ DOLL'DOM; DOLL'HOOD; DOLL'SHIP;
DOLL'S'-HOUSE. [Prob. from _Dolly_, familiar dim. of _Dorothy_.]

DOLLAR, dol'ar, _n._ a silver coin (= 100 cents) of U.S.A., Mexico,
Singapore, &c. The U.S.A. dollar = about 4s. 2d. sterling.--_adjs._
DOLL'ARED; DOLL'ARLESS.--_ns._ DOLLAROC'RACY; DOLL'ARSHIP. [Ger., short for
_Joachimsthaler_, because first coined at the silver mines in Joachimsthal
(Joachim's dale) in Bohemia--Low Ger. _daler_, Sw., Dan. _daler_.]

DOLLOP, dol'op, _n._ a lump.--Also DALL'OP. [Prob. cog. with Norw. dial.
_dolp_, a lump.]

DOLLY, dol'i, _n._ a complimentary offering of flowers, sweetmeats, &c. on
a tray. [Anglo-Ind.,--Hindi, _d[=a]l[=i]_.]

DOLLY, dol'i, _n._ dim. of DOLL.--_adj._ babyish.--_n._ DOLL'INESS.

DOLLY, dol'i, _n._ a wooden shaft attached to a disc with projecting arms,
used for stirring clothes in a washing-tub; somewhat similar pieces of
apparatus in mining, pile-driving, &c.--_v.t._ to wash (clothes) in a tub:
to beat (red-hot metal) with a hammer: to crush ore with a dolly, to obtain
or yield by this method.--_adj._ DOLL'IED.--_n._ DOLL'IER. [Prob. from
_Dolly_, the familiar form of _Dorothy_.]

DOLLY-SHOP, dol'i-shop, _n._ a marine store, a low pawn-shop--often having
a black doll as signboard.

DOLLY VARDEN, dol'i vär'den, _n._ a flowered muslin dress for women, with
pointed bodice and tucked-up skirt: a large hat, one side bent downwards,
abundantly trimmed with flowers. [Named from _Dolly Varden_, a character in
Dickens's _Barnaby Rudge_.]

DOLMAN, dol'man, _n._ a Turkish robe with slight sleeves and open in front:
a hussar's jacket, worn like a cloak, with one or both sleeves hanging
loose. [Fr.,--Turk. _d[=o]l[=a]m[=a]n_.]

[Illustration]

DOLMEN, dol'men, _n._ a stone table: the French name for a cromlech, a
prehistoric structure of two or more erect unhewn stones, supporting a
large flattish stone. [Fr. _dolmen_; usually explained as Bret.
_dolmen_--_dol_, _taol_, table, _men_, a stone. But _tolmen_ in Cornish
meant 'hole of stone.']

DOLOMITE, dol'o-m[=i]t, _n._ a magnesian limestone, so called from the
French geologist D. Guy de _Dolomieu_ (1750-1801).--_adj._ DOLOMIT'IC.

DOLOUR, d[=o]'lor, _n._ pain: grief: anguish.--_adjs._ DOLORIF'EROUS,
DOLORI'FIC, causing or expressing dolour, pain, or grief.--_adv._
DOLOR[=O]'SO (_mus._), noting a soft and pathetic manner.--_adj._
DOL'OROUS, full of dolour, pain, or grief: doleful.--_adv._
DOL'OROUSLY.--_n._ DOL'OROUSNESS.--DOLOURS OF THE VIRGIN, the prophecy of
Simeon, the flight into Egypt, the three days' loss of Jesus, the meeting
of Him on the way to Calvary, the crucifixion, the descent from the cross,
the entombment. [Fr.,--L. _dol[=e]re_, to grieve.]

DOLPHIN, dol'fin, _n._ an animal of the whale kind, closely resembling the
porpoise, about 8 or 10 feet long: the coryphæna, a fish about 5 feet in
length, noted for the brilliancy of its colours when dying.--_ns._
DOL'PHINET (_Spens._), a female dolphin; DOL'PHIN-FLY, a black aphis or
plant-louse, destructive to bean-plants. [O. Fr. _daulphin_--L.
_delphinus_--Gr. _delphis_, _-phinos_.]

DOLT, d[=o]lt, _n._ a dull or stupid fellow.--_adj._ DOLT'ISH, dull:
stupid.--_adv._ DOLT'ISHLY.--_n._ DOLT'ISHNESS. [_Dolt_ = _dulled_ or
blunted. See DULL.]

DOM, dom, _n._ the Portuguese form of _Don_: also a title given to certain
Catholic dignitaries and members of some monastic orders, esp. the
Benedictine. [L. _dominus_, lord.]

DOMAIN, do-m[=a]n', _n._ what one is master of or has dominion over: an
estate: territory: ownership of land: the scope or range of any subject or
sphere of knowledge.--_adjs._ DOMAIN'AL, DOM[=A]'NIAL. [Fr.,--L.
_dominium_, _dominus_, a master.]

DOMAL, d[=o]m'al, _adj._ relating to a house. [L. _domus_, a house.]

DOMBOC, d[=o]m'b[=o]k, _n._ a collection of laws made by authority of King
Alfred, but now lost. [A.S. _dóm_, judgment, law, and _bóc_, book.]

DOMDANIEL, dom-dan'yel, _n._ a hall under the sea inhabited by a sorcerer
and his disciples: (_Carlyle_) an infernal cave, den of iniquity generally.
[Fr.,--Gr. _d[=o]ma Dani[=e]l_, house of Daniel.]

DOME, d[=o]m, _n._ a structure raised above the roof of large buildings,
usually hemispherical: a large cupola: a cathedral: (_poet._) a
building.--_v.t._ to furnish with a dome.--_adjs._ DOMED, DOM'ICAL, having
a dome. [L. _domus_, a house; Fr. _dôme_, It. _duomo_, Ger. _dom_.]

DOME, d[=o]m, _n._ (_Spen._). Same as DOOM.

DOMESDAY-, DOOMSDAY-BOOK, d[=oo]mz'd[=a]-book, _n._ a book compiled by
order of William the Conqueror, containing a survey of all the lands in
England, their value, owners, &c.--so called from its authority in judgment
(A.S. _dóm_) on the matters contained in it.

DOMESTIC, do-mes'tik, _adj._ belonging to the house: remaining much at
home: private: tame: not foreign.--_n._ a servant in the house: (_pl._)
articles of home manufacture, esp. home-made cotton cloths.--_adv._
DOMES'TICALLY.--_v.t._ DOMES'TIC[=A]TE, to make domestic or familiar: to
tame.--_ns._ DOMESTIC[=A]'TION; DOMESTIC[=A]'TOR; DOMESTIC'ITY.--DOMESTIC
ARCHITECTURE, the architecture of mansions, dwelling-houses, cottages, &c.;
DOMESTIC ECONOMY, the principles of thrifty housekeeping. [Fr.,--L.
_domesticus_--_domus_, a house.]

DOMET, dom'et, _n._ a kind of plain cloth, in which the warp is cotton and
the weft woollen.

DOMICILE, dom'i-sil, _n._ a house: an abode: a man's legal place of
residence.--_v.t._ to establish a fixed residence.--_adjs._ DOM'ICILED;
DOMICIL'IARY, pertaining to the domicile.--_v.t._ DOMICIL'I[=A]TE, to
establish in a permanent residence.--_n._ DOMICILI[=A]'TION.--DOMICILIARY
VISIT, a visit, under authority, to a private house for the purpose of
searching it. [Fr.,--L. _domicilium_--_domus_, a house.]

DOMINANT, dom'in-ant, _adj._ prevailing: predominant.--_n._ (_mus._) the
fifth note of the scale in its relation to the first and third.--_ns._
DOM'INANCE, DOM'INANCY, ascendency.--_adv._ DOM'INANTLY. [L. _dominans_,
_-antis_, pr.p. of _domin[=a]ri_, to be master.]

DOMINATE, dom'in-[=a]t, _v.t._ to be lord over: to govern: to prevail over,
to be the chief feature of.--_n._ DOMIN[=A]'TION, government: absolute
authority: tyranny.--_adj._ DOM'INATIVE, governing: (_rare_)
arbitrary.--_n._ DOM'INATOR (_Shak._), a ruler or governor: a ruling
influence. [L. _domin[=a]ri_, _-[=a]tus_, to be master--_dominus_,
master--_domare_ = Eng. _tame_.]

DOMINEER, dom-in-[=e]r', _v.i._ to rule arbitrarily: to command haughtily:
to be overbearing.--_adj._ DOMINEER'ING, overbearing. [Prob. through Dut.
from O. Fr. _dominer_--L. _domin[=a]ri_.]

DOMINICAL, do-min'ik-al, _adj._ belonging to our Lord, as the Lord's
Prayer, the Lord's Day.--DOMINICAL LETTER, one of the first seven letters
of the alphabet, used in calendars to mark the Sundays throughout the year.
[Low L. _dominicalis_--L. _dominicus_--_dominus_, lord, master.]

DOMINICAN, do-min'i-kan, _adj._ belonging to St _Dominic_ or to the
_Dominicans_.--_n._ a friar or monk of the order of St Dominic--_Fratres
Predicatores_, founded in 1215--the _Black Friars_, from their black
mantle.

DOMINIE, dom'i-ni, _n._ (_Scot._) a schoolmaster, a tutor: in parts of the
United States, a clergyman. [L. _domine_, voc. case of _dominus_, lord,
master, sir.]

DOMINION, do-min'yun, _n._ lordship: highest power and authority: control:
the country or persons governed, esp. the Dominion of Canada: (_pl._, _B._)
a class of angelic spirits (Col. i. 16).--_n._ DOMIN'IUM, the ownership of
a thing.--DOMINION DAY, a Canadian festival on the anniversary of the union
of the provinces, 1st July 1867.

DOMINO, dom'i-no, _n._ a cape with a hood worn by a master or by a priest:
a long cloak of black silk with a hood, used at masked balls, a person
wearing such: one of the oblong pieces with which the game of DOM'INOES
(-n[=o]z) is played, usually twenty-eight in number, divided into two
compartments, each of which is blank or marked with from one to six spots.
[Sp. _domino_--L. _dominus_.]

DOMINUS. See DOMINIE.

DON, don, _n._ a Spanish title, corresponding to English Sir, formerly
applied only to noblemen, now to all classes: a fellow of a college, a
college authority: (_coll._) a swell, adept:--_fem._ DOÑA, in English,
usually with the Italian spelling, DON'NA.--_adj._ DON'NISH, pertaining to
a don: with the airs of a don.--_ns._ DON'NISM, self-importance; DON'SHIP,
rank or dignity of a don. [Sp.,--L. _dominus_.]

DON, don, _v.t._ to do or put on: to assume:--_pr.p._ don'ning; _pa.p._
donned. [A contr. of _do on_.]

DONAT, do'nat, _n._ a grammar, a primer.--Also DON'ET. [O. Fr. _donat_,
from Ælius _Donatus_, author about 358 A.D. of a long famous Latin
grammar.]

DONATION, do-n[=a]'shun, _n._ act of giving: that which is given, a gift of
money or goods: (_law_) the act by which a person freely transfers his
title to anything to another.--_n._ D[=O]'NARY, a thing given to a sacred
use.--_v.t._ DON[=A]TE', to present a gift.--_n._ DON'ATIVE, a gift: a
gratuity: a benefice presented by the founder or patron without reference
to the bishop.--_adj._ vested or vesting by donation.--_ns._ DON[=A]'TOR,
one who makes a gift, a donor; DON'ATORY (_Scots law_), one to whom lands
escheated to the crown are made over; DONEE', the person to whom a gift is
made; D[=O]'NOR, a giver: a benefactor.--DONA NOBIS, the last section of
the mass, beginning 'Dona nobis pacem.' [Fr.,--L. _don[=a]re_,
_-[=a]tum_--_donum_, a gift--_d[)a]re_, to give.]

DONATISTS, don'a-tists, _n.pl._ the members of an African sect in the
Christian Church of the 4th and 5th centuries, who protested against any
diminution of the extreme reverence paid to martyrs, who treated the lapsed
severely, and rebaptised converts from the Catholic Church.--_n._
DON'ATISM.--_adjs._ DONATIS'TIC, -AL. [From _Donatus_, one of their
leaders.]

DONE, dun, _pa.p._ of DO, often with sense of utterly exhausted: so DONE
UP, DONE OUT.

DONGA, dong'ga, _n._ the South African name for a channel or gully formed
by the action of water.

DONJON, dun'jun, _n._ a strong central tower in ancient castles, to which
the garrison retreated when hard pressed. [A doublet of _dungeon_.]

DONKEY, dong'ki, _n._ the ass.--_ns._ DON'KEY-EN'GINE, a small engine used
in steam-vessels for loading and unloading, pumping water into the boilers,
&c.; DON'KEY-PUMP, an extra steam-pump. [Still regarded as slang in 1823.
Perh. = _dun-ik-ie_, a double dim. of _dun_, from its colour; or from
_Duncan_, cf. DICKY.]

DONNA. See DON.

DONNERED, don'erd, _adj._ (_Scot._) stupefied, stunned.--Also DONN'ERD,
DONN'ERT.

DO-NOTHING, d[=oo]'-nuth'ing, _n._ one who does nothing: a lazy or idle
person: a fainéant.--_ns._ DO-NOTH'INGISM, DO-NOTH'INGNESS.

DONSIE, don'si, _adj._ (_Scot._) unlucky, perverse: neat, trim: sickly.

DON'T, d[=o]nt. For _do not_.

DONZEL, don'zel, _n._ a page or squire:--_fem._ DONZEL'LA.

DOOB, d[=oo]b, _n._ Indian name for the dog's-tooth grass.

DOOD, d[=oo]d, _n._ a riding camel or dromedary. [Beng.]

DOODLE, d[=oo]d'l, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to dandle.

DOODLE, d[=oo]d'l, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to drone, as a bagpipe.

DOOK, d[=oo]k, _n._ (_Scot._) a plug of wood driven into a wall to hold a
nail, &c.

DOOLEFULL, d[=oo]l'fool, _adj._ (_Spens._) = DOLEFUL.--_ns._ DOOL'-TREE,
DULE'-TREE (_Scot._), a tree that marks a place of mourning.

DOOLIE. See DHOOLY.

DOOM, d[=oo]m, _n._ judgment: condemnation: destiny: ruin: final judgment:
a picture of the Last Judgment.--_v.t._ to pronounce judgment on: to
sentence: to condemn:--_pr.p._ d[=oo]m'ing; _pa.p._ d[=oo]med.--_adjs._
DOOMED, under sentence; DOOM'FUL (_Spens._), full of doom, ruin, or
destructive power.--_adv._ DOOMS (_Scot._) very, exceedingly.--_ns._
DOOMS'DAY, the day of doom, the day when the world will be judged;
DOOMS'DAY-BOOK (see DOMESDAY); DOOMS'MAN, one who pronounces doom or
sentence, a judge.--CRACK OF DOOM, the signal for the final dissolution of
all things, the last trump. [A.S. _dóm_, judgment.]

DOOM-PALM, d[=oo]m'-päm, _n._ a kind of African palm, with a branched stem,
tufts of fan-shaped leaves, and a fruit as big as an apple.

DOOR, d[=o]r, _n._ the usual entrance into a house, room, or passage: the
wooden frame on hinges closing up the entrance: a means of approach or
access.--_ns._ DOOR'-BELL; DOOR'-CASE, the frame which encloses a door;
DOOR'-CHEEK (_Scot._), one of the side-posts of a door; DOOR'-KEEP'ER;
DOOR'-KNOCK'ER; DOOR'-MAT; DOOR'-NAIL; DOOR'-PLATE, a plate on or at a door
with the householder's name on it; DOOR'-POST, the jamb or side-piece of a
door; DOOR'-SILL, the threshold of a doorway; DOOR'-STEAD, a doorway;
DOOR'-STEP, DOOR'-STONE, the step-stone; DOOR'WAY, the entrance or passage
closed by the door; DOOR'-YARD, a yard about the door of a house;
FOLD'ING-DOOR, a door in two halves, each of which may be folded back
against the wall.--DARKEN ONE'S DOOR, to cross one's threshold; DEATH'S
DOOR, on the point of death, in great danger of death; NEXT DOOR TO, in the
house next to: near to, bordering upon, very nearly; OUT OF DOORS, in the
open air; SHOW TO THE DOOR, to dismiss with ignominy. [A.S. _duru_; Ger.
_thor_, _thür_; Gr. _thyra_, L. _fores_ (_pl._), a door.]

DOP, dop, _n._ a copper cup with a wooden handle, in which a gem is
soldered to be held while being cut or polished. [Dut.]

DOP, dop, _v.i._ to dip or duck.--_n._ a diving bird.

DOPE, d[=o]p, _n._ any thick liquid used as a lubricant, axle-grease: any
absorbent material holding a thick liquid, as cotton-waste, or a substance
used to hold nitro-glycerine. [Prob. Dut. _doop_, a dipping.]

DOPPER, dop'er, _n._ a member of a rigid religious sect in South Africa.

DOPPLERITE, dop'ler-[=i]t, _n._ a substance derived from the maceration of
peat. [From _Doppler_, a German physicist.]

DOQUET, dok'et, a form of _docket_.

DOR, dor, _n._ (_obs._) a scoff, mockery, as 'to give (any one) the dor.'
[Prob. Ice. _dór_, scoff.]

DOR, DORR, dor, _n._ a kind of dung-beetle, also called _Dor-beetle_ and
_Dor-fly_; a cockchafer (in U.S. called _Dor-bug_): (_obs._) a drone. [A.S.
_dora_, a humble-bee.]

DORADO, d[=o]-rä'd[=o], _n._ the dolphin, so called from its beautiful
colour when dying. [Sp., from _dorar_, to gild--L. _deaur[=a]re_,
_[=a]tum_. See DORY, EL DORADO.]

DORCAS, dor'kas, _n._ given in Acts, ix. 36, as the Greek translation of
_Tabitha_ (Aramaic, 'female gazelle'), the name of the Christian woman of
Joppa, famous for her good works, esp. the making of clothes for the
poor--hence DORCAS SOCIETIES, ladies' societies for making and providing
clothes for the poor.

DOREE. See DORY.

DOR-HAWK, dor'-hawk, _n._ the common goatsucker, night-jar, or fern-owl.

DORIAN, d[=o]'ri-an, _adj._ and _n._ belonging to _Doris_ in Greece, Doric:
a native of Doris.

DORIC, dor'ik, _adj._ belonging to _Doris_ in Greece, denoting one of the
Greek orders of architecture, distinguished by its simplicity and
solidity.--_n._ one of the modes of Greek music: a dialect of the Greek
language distinguished by the use of broad vowel sounds: any dialect having
this character, as Scotch.--_ns._ DOR'ICISM, DOR'ISM, a peculiarity of the
Doric dialect. [Fr. _dorique_--L. _Doricus_--Gr. _D[=o]ris_.]

DORKING, dork'ing, _n._ a square-bodied breed of poultry, variously
coloured, and with five claws on each foot--so named from _Dorking_ in
Surrey.

DORLACH, dor'lah, _n._ a bundle, a knapsack.--Also DOR'LOCH. [Gael.]

DORMANT, dor'mant, _adj._ sleeping: at rest: not used, in abeyance (as a
title): in a sleeping posture: (_archit._) leaning.--_n._ a crossbeam: a
joist.--_n._ DOR'MANCY, quiescence.--_ns._ DOR'MER-WIN'DOW, a vertical
window, esp. of a sleeping-room (formerly called _dormer_), on the sloping
roof of a house; DORMI'TION, sleeping.--_adj._ DOR'MITIVE, causing sleep
(of medicine), as opium.--_ns._ DOR'MITORY, a large sleeping-chamber with
many beds; DOR'MOUSE, a small rodent intermediate between the squirrel and
the mouse, so called because torpid in winter:--_pl._ DOR'MICE; DOR'TOUR
(_Spens._) a dormitory. [Fr. _dormir_--L. _dorm[=i]re_, to sleep.]

DORMY, DORMIE, dor'mi, _adj._ a term applied to one player at golf, when he
is as many holes ahead as there remain holes to be played.

DORNICK, dor'nik, _n._ a kind of stout figured linen, originally made at
_Doornik_, or Tournay, in Belgium.

DORP, dorp, _n._ a rare form of _thorp_, village.

DORSAL, dor'sal, _adj._ pertaining or belonging to the back.--_adv._
DOR'SALLY.--_n._ DORSE (_obs._), the back of a writing: a dossal: the
back.--_adj._ DORSIBRANCH'IATE, having gills on the back.--_n._ one of the
_Dorsibranchiata_, including free marine worms.--_adjs._ DORSIF'EROUS,
dorsigerous: dorsiparous; DORSIG'EROUS, carrying on the back; DOR'SIGRADE,
walking on the back of the toes; DORSIP'AROUS, bearing fruit on the back:
hatching young upon the back; DOR'SISPIN'AL, pertaining to both the back
and the spine; DORSIVEN'TRAL, DORSABDOM'INAL, pertaining to the back and
the belly; DORSOCAU'DAL, superior and posterior in direction or position;
DORSOCER'VICAL, pertaining to the back of the neck.--_n._ DORSOFLEX'ION, a
bending of the back, a bow.--_adjs._ DORSOLAT'ERAL, pertaining to the back
and the side; DORSOLUM'BAR, pertaining to the whole dorsal region of the
trunk--also DORSILUM'BAR; DORSOM[=E]'DIAN, situated in the middle of the
back; DORSOMES'AL, lying along the middle line of the back--also
DORSIMES'AL; DORSOPLEU'RAL, pertaining to the back and the side.--_n._
DORS'UM.--SEND TO DORSE, to throw on the back. [Fr.,--L. _dorsum_, the
back.]

DORSE, dors, _n._ a young cod. [Low Ger. _dorsch_.]

DORTY, dor'ti, _adj._ (_Scot._), pettish: delicate.

DORY, d[=o]'ri, _n._ a fish of a golden-yellow colour.--Also JOHN DORY and
DOREE. [Fr. _dorée_, from _dorer_, to gild--L. _deaur[=a]re_, to
gild--_de_, of, with, and _aurum_, gold. _John_ is simply the ordinary
name.]

DOSE, d[=o]s, _n._ the quantity of medicine given to be taken at one time:
a portion: anything disagreeable that must be taken.--_v.t._ to order or
give in doses: to give anything nauseous to.--_ns._ D[=O]S'AGE, a practice
or method of dosing; DOSIM'ETER, an apparatus for measuring minute
quantities of liquid.--_adj._ DOSIMET'RIC.--_n._ DOSOL'OGY, the science of
doses--also DOSIOL'OGY. [O. Fr. _dose_--Gr. _dosis_, a giving--_did[=o]mi_,
I give.]

DOSEH, d[=o]'se, _n._ a religious ceremony at Cairo during the festival of
the Moolid, in which the sheik rides on horseback over the prostrate bodies
of dervishes.

DOSSAL, dos'sal, _n._ a cloth hanging, of various colours at various
festivals, for the back of an altar and the sides of the chancel of a
church.--Also DOS'SEL. [Late L. _dossale_, _dorsale_--L. _dorsum_, the
back.]

DOSSER, dos'er, _n._ a rich hanging of tapestry for the walls of a hall or
of a chancel: a pannier.

DOSS-HOUSE, dos'-hows, _n._ a very cheap lodging-house.--_n._ DOSS'ER, one
who lodges in a doss-house. [Perh. from _doss_, a prov. Eng. name for a
hassock.]

DOSSIL, dos'il, _n._ a plug, spigot: a cloth roll for wiping ink from an
engraved plate in printing: (_surg._) a pledget of lint for cleaning out a
wound. [O. Fr. _dosil_--Late L. _ducillus_, a spigot.]

DOST, dust, 2d pers. sing. pres. indic. of DO.

DOT, dot, _n._ any small mark made with a pen or sharp point.--_v.t._ to
mark with dots: to diversify with objects.--_v.i._ to form dots:--_pr.p._
dot'ting; _pa.p._ dot'ted.--DOT AND CARRY, in addition, to set down the
units and carry over the tens to the next column. [Prob. related to the
Dut. _dot_, a little lump.]

DOTATION, d[=o]-t[=a]'shun, _n._ the act of bestowing a dowry on a woman:
an endowment.--_n._ DOT, a marriage portion.--_adj._ D[=O]'TAL, pertaining
to dowry or to dower. [Low L. _dotation-em_--L. _dot[=a]re_, to endow.]

DOTE, d[=o]t, _v.i._ (_arch._) to be stupid or foolish: to be weakly
affectionate: to show excessive love--formerly also spelt _Doat_.--_ns._
D[=O]T'AGE, a doting: childishness of old age: excessive fondness;
D[=O]T'ANT (_Shak._), a dotard; D[=O]T'ARD, one who dotes: one showing the
weakness of old age, or excessive fondness.--_adj._ D[=O]T'ED (_Spens._),
stupid.--_n._ D[=O]T'ER, one who dotes.--_p.adj._ and _n._
D[=O]T'ING.--_adjs._ D[=O]T'ISH, silly; DOT'TLE (_Scot._), stupid.--_n._ a
dotard.--_adj._ DOT'TY, feeble in mind: tottering. [Old Dut. _doten_, to be
silly, Scot. _doitet_, stupid; Fr. _radoter_, to rave, is from the same
root.]

DOTH, duth, 3d pers. sing. pres. indic. of DO.

DOTTEREL, dot'[.e]r-el, _n._ a kind of plover, named from its apparent
stupidity in allowing itself to be approached and caught: a stupid fellow,
a dupe. [Also spelt _dottrel_, from _dote_.]

DOTTLE, dot'l, _n._ (_Scot._) a plug, esp. the tobacco at the bottom of a
pipe after smoking, sometimes put on the top of fresh tobacco after
refilling.

DOUANE, d[=oo]-än', _n._ a custom-house.--_n._ DOUAN'IER, a custom-house
officer. [Fr.]

DOUAR, DOWAR, dow'ar, _n._ a cluster of Arab tents in a circle.

DOUAY BIBLE. See RHEMISH (version).

DOUBLE, dub'l, _adj._ twofold: twice as much: of extra weight, size, or
quality: two of a sort together: in pairs: acting two parts,
insincere.--_adv._ DOUB'LY. [O. Fr. _doble_--L. _duplus_--_duo_, two, and
_plus_, akin to _plenus_, full.]

DOUBLE, dub'l, _v.t._ to multiply by two, to be the double of: to fold: to
repeat: to clench: to pass round or by.--_v.i._ to increase to twice the
quantity: to turn sharply back on one's course in running.--_n._ twice as
much: a duplicate: an actor's substitute: a quick pace (short for
double-quick): one's wraith or apparition: one's exact counterpart: a
trick: (_eccles._) a feast on which the antiphon is said both before and
after the psalms.--_adjs._ DOUB'LE-ACT'ING, applying power in two
directions: producing a double result; DOU'BLE-BANKED, having two men at
each oar, or having two tiers of oars one above the other, as in ancient
galleys; DOUB'LE-BARR'ELLED, having two barrels.--_n._ DOUB'LE-BASS, the
lowest-toned instrument of violin form.--_adjs._ DOUB'LE-BIT'ING, cutting
on either side; DOUB'LE-BREAST'ED, of a coat having two breasts, one to be
folded over the other.--_ns._ DOUB'LE-CHARGE, to charge with a double
measure; DOUB'LE-DEAL'ER, a deceitful person; DOUB'LE-DEAL'ING,
duplicity.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-DECKED, having two decks above water-line.--_n._
DOUB'LE-DECK'ER, a double-decked frigate.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-DYED, twice dyed:
deeply imbued (as a double-dyed villain).--_n._ DOUB'LE-EA'GLE (_U.S._), a
gold coin worth $20, or £4, 2s. 2d.: the heraldic representation of an
eagle with two heads, as in the arms of Russia and Austria.--_adj._
DOUB'LE-EDGED, having two edges: cutting or working both ways.--_ns._
DOUB'LE-END'ER, anything having two ends alike: a cross-cut sawing machine,
with two adjustable circular saws, for sawing both ends of timber;
DOUB'LE-EN'TRY (_book-k._), a method by which two entries are made of each
transaction.--_adjs._ DOUB'LE-EYED, having a deceitful countenance;
DOUB'LE-FACED, hypocritical, false.--_ns._ DOUB'LE-F[=A]'CEDNESS;
DOUB'LE-FIRST, at Oxford, a degree with first-class honours in mathematics
and classics: one who takes such a degree.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-FLOW'ERED,
having double flowers, as a plant.--_v.t._ DOUB'LE-GILD, to gild with
double coatings of gold: to gloze over.--_n._ DOUB'LE-GLOS'TER,
Gloucestershire cheese of extra richness.--_adjs._ DOUB'LE-HAND'ED, having
two hands, two-handled; DOUB'LE-HEAD'ED, having two heads;
DOUB'LE-HEART'ED, treacherous; DOUB'LE-HUNG, suspended, as a window-sash,
so as to move either upward or downward; DOUB'LE-LOCKED, locked with two
locks or bolts: locked by two turns of the key, as in very few locks but
many novels; DOUB'LE-MANNED, furnished with twice the complement of men;
DOUB'LE-MEAN'ING, deceitful; DOUB'LE-MIND'ED, undetermined, wavering.--_n._
DOUB'LE-MIND'EDNESS.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-N[=A]'TURED, having a twofold
nature.--_n._ DOUB'LENESS, the state of being double: duplicity.--_adj._
and _adv._ DOUB'LE-QUICK, the pace next a run.--_n._ the double-quick
pace.--_v.t._ DOUB'LE-SHADE (_Milt._), to double the natural
darkness.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-SHOT'TED, of cannon, with two shots in
them.--_ns._ DOUB'LE-SHUFF'LE (see SHUFFLE); DOUB'LE-STOP'PING, playing on
two stopped strings of a violin at once; DOUB'LE-STOUT, extra strong stout
or porter.--_adj._ DOUB'LE-TONGUED, deceitful.--_n._ DOUB'LING, the act of
making double: a turning back in running: a trick: a plait or fold.--_adj._
shifting, manoeuvring.

DOUBLE ENTENDRE, doobl' ong-tongdr, _n._ an equivoque, a word or phrase
with two meanings, one usually more or less indecent. [Fr. of 17th century,
superseded now by (_mot_) _à double entente_.]

DOUBLET, dub'let, _n._ a pair: an inner garment: name given to words that
are really the same, but vary somewhat in spelling and signification, as
_desk_, _disc_, and _dish_, _describe_ and _descry_. [O. Fr., dim. of
_double_.]

DOUBLOON, dub-loon', _n._ an obsolete Spanish gold coin double the value of
a pistole--varying from 33s. in 1772 to 20s. 8d. in 1848. [Sp. _doblon_.]

DOUBT, dowt, _v.i._ to waver in opinion: to be uncertain: to hesitate: to
suspect: to believe with fear or hesitation: (_Scot._) to think, even
without the sense of hesitation.--_v.t._ to hold in doubt: to
distrust.--_p.adj._ DOUBT'ED (_Spens._), questioned: feared, redoubted. [O.
Fr. _douter_--L. _dubit[=a]re_, akin to _dubius_, doubtful, moving in two
(_duo_) directions.]

DOUBT, dowt, _n._ uncertainty of mind: suspicion: fear: a thing doubted or
questioned.--_adj._ DOUBT'ABLE.--_n._ DOUB'TER.--_adj._ DOUBT'FUL, full of
doubt: undetermined: not clear: not secure: suspicious: not
confident.--_adv._ DOUBT'FULLY.--_n._ DOUBT'FULNESS.--_p.adj._ DOUBT'ING,
that doubts, undecided.--_advs._ DOUBT'INGLY; DOUBT'LESS, without doubt:
certainly; DOUBT'LESSLY.

DOUC, dook, _n._ a species of monkey in Cochin-China.

DOUCE, d[=oo]s, _adj._ (_obs._) sweet: (_Scot._) sober, peaceable,
sedate.--_adv._ DOUCE'LY.--_n._ DOUCE'NESS.--_n.pl._ DOUC'ETS, the stones
of a deer.--_n._ DOUCEUR (d[=oo]-s[.e]r'), sweetness of manner (_obs._):
something intended to please, a present or a bribe. [Fr. _doux_, _douce_,
mild--L. _dulcis_, sweet.]

DOUCHE, d[=oo]sh, _n._ a jet of water directed upon the body from a pipe:
an apparatus for throwing such. [Fr.,--It. _doccia_, a water-pipe--L.
_duc[)e]re_, to lead.]

DOUCINE, doo-s[=e]n', _n._ (_archit._) a cyma recta. [Fr.]

DOUGH, d[=o], _n._ a mass of flour or meal moistened and kneaded, but not
baked.--_adjs._ DOUGH'-BAKED, half-baked, defective in intelligence;
DOUGH'FACED (_U.S._) pliable, truckling.--_n._ DOUGH'INESS.--_adj._
DOUGH'-KNEAD'ED (_Milt._), soft.--_n._ DOUGH'-NUT, sweetened dough fried in
fat.--_adj._ DOUGH'Y, like dough: soft. [A.S. _dáh_; Ger. _teig_, Ice.
_deig_, dough; prov. _dow_ and _duff_.]

DOUGHTY, dow'ti, _adj._ able, strong: brave.--_adv._ DOUGH'TILY.--_n._
DOUGH'TINESS. [A.S. _dyhtig_, valiant--_dugan_, to be strong; Ger.
_tüchtig_, solid.]

DOUM-PALM. Same as DOOM-PALM.

DOUP, dowp, _n._ (_Scot._) bottom, buttocks.--_n._ CAN'DLE-DOUP, a
candle-end. [Cf. Ice. _daup_.]

DOUR, d[=oo]r, _adj._ (_Scot._) obstinate: bold. [Fr.,--L. _durus_, hard.]

DOURA. See DURRA.

DOUSE, DOWSE, dows, _v.t._ to plunge into water.--_v.i._ to fall suddenly
into water. [Cf. Sw. _dunsa_, fall heavily. Prob. from sound; cf. _souse_.]

DOUSE, DOWSE, dows, _v.t._ to strike: to strike or lower a sail.--_n._ a
heavy blow. [Prob. related to Old Dut. _dossen_, to beat.]

DOUSE, DOWSE, dows, _v.t._ to put out, extinguish (esp. in the _slang_
DOUSE THE GLIM, put out the light). [Prob. a corr. of the obs. verb _dout_
below; more likely a particular use of _douse_, to strike.]

DOUT, dowt, _v.t._ to put out, extinguish.--_n._ DOUT'ER. [_Do out._]

DOVE, duv, _n._ a pigeon (esp. in comp., as _ringdove_, _turtle-dove_,
&c.): a word of endearment: an emblem of innocence, gentleness, also of the
Holy Spirit--the 'Holy Dove' (Matt. iii. 16).--_v.t._ to treat as a
dove.--_ns._ DOVE'-COL'OUR, a grayish, bluish, pinkish colour; DOVE'COT,
-COTE, a small cot or box in which pigeons breed.--_adjs._ DOVE'-DRAWN
(_Shak._), drawn by doves; DOVE'-EYED, meek-eyed.--_ns._ DOVE'-HOUSE, a
dovecot; DOVE'LET, a small dove.--_adj._ DOVE'-LIKE, innocent.--_ns._
DOVE'S'-FOOT, the common name for _Geranium molle_; DOVE'SHIP, the
character or quality of a dove.--FLUTTER THE DOVECOTS, to disturb
commonplace, conventional people, as the eagle would a dovecot (see Shak.,
_Cor._ V. vi. 115). [A.S. _dufe_ in _dúfe-doppa_; Ger. _taube_.]

DOVEKIE, duv'ki, _n._ the little auk, a diving bird of the North Atlantic
and Arctic Oceans.

DOVER, d[=o]'ver, _v.i._ (_Scot._) to slumber lightly, doze off.--_v.t._ to
send off into a light sleep.--_n._ a slight unsettled sleep.

DOVER'S POWDER, d[=o]'verz pow'der, _n._ a valuable sudorific medicine,
compounded of ipecacuanha root, powdered opium, and sulphate of potash.
[From Dr Thomas _Dover_, 1660-1742.]

[Illustration]

DOVETAIL, duv't[=a]l, _n._ a mode of fastening boards together by fitting
pieces shaped like a wedge or a dove's tail spread out (_tenons_) into
corresponding cavities (_mortises_).--_v.t._ to fit one thing into another.

DOW, dow, _v.i._ (_obs._) to be good for a purpose: (_Scot._) to be
able.--_p.adjs._ DOCHT, DOUGHT. [A.S. _dugan_.]

DOWAGER, dow'a-j[.e]r, _n._ a widow with a dower or jointure: a title given
to a widow to distinguish her from the wife of her husband's heir. [O. Fr.
_douagere_--Low L. _dotarium_--L. _dot[=a]re_, to endow.]

DOWDY, dow'di, _adj._ untidy, carelessly dressed, soft and slack in
habit.--_n._ an untidy woman.--_adv._ DOW'DILY.--_ns._ DOW'DINESS,
DOW'DYISM.--_adj._ DOW'DYISH. [Ety. unknown.]

DOWEL, dow'el, _n._ a pin of wood or iron inserted in the edges of two
adjacent boards for the purpose of fastening them together.--_v.t._ to
fasten by means of dowels.--_ns._ DOW'EL-JOINT; DOW'EL-PIN. [Prob. related
to Ger. _döbel_, a plug.]

DOWER, dow'[.e]r, _n._ a jointure, that part of the husband's property
which his widow enjoys during her life--sometimes used for DOW'RY.--_adjs._
DOW'ABLE, that may be endowed; DOW'ERED, furnished with dower.--_n._
DOW'ER-HOUSE, the house set apart for the widow.--_adj._ DOW'ERLESS. [O.
Fr. _douaire_--Low L. _dotarium_--L. _dot[=a]re_, to endow.]

DOWF, dowf, _adj._ (_Scot._) dull, heavy, spiritless.--_n._ DOWF'NESS.
[Prob. Ice. _daufr_, deaf.]

DOWIE, dow'i, _adj._ (_Scot._) dull, low-spirited, sad. [Prob. A.S. _dol_,
dull.]

DOWLAS, dowlas, _n._ a coarse linen cloth. [From _Daoulas_ or _Doulas_,
near Brest, in Brittany.]

DOWLE, dowl, _n._ (_Shak._) a portion of down in a feather.

DOWN, down, _n._ the soft hair under the feathers of fowls: the hairy
covering of the seeds of certain plants: anything which soothes or invites
to repose.--_n._ DOWN'-BED.--_p.adj._ DOWNED, filled or covered with
down.--_ns._ DOWN'INESS; DOWN'-QUILT.--_adj._ DOWN'Y, covered with or made
of down: like down: soft: soothing: (_slang_) knowing.--THE DOWNY
(_slang_), bed. [Ice. _dúnn_; Ger. _daune_, _dune_.]

DOWN, down, _n._ a bank of sand thrown up by the sea (same as DUNE): a
treeless land: (_pl._) a tract of hilly land, used for pasturing sheep, as
the North Downs (Kent) and South Downs (Sussex)--also given to the famous
roadstead off the east coast of Kent, inside the Goodwin Sands. [A.S.
_dún_, a hill; prob. from Celt. _dun_, as in _Dun_keld, &c.]

DOWN, down, _adv._ from a higher to a lower position: on the ground: from
earlier to later times: from thick to thin, from large to small (to boil
down, to cut down): from more to less (to beat down a price).--_prep._
along a descent: from a higher to a lower position or state.--_v.t._ to
knock down: to dispirit--also used as a kind of interjection, with _get_,
_go_, _come_, _kneel_, &c. understood.--_n._ a tendency to be down upon, a
grudge against: a descent, reverse of fortune.--_v.i._ DOWN'-BEAR, to bear
or press down.--_adj._ DOWN'CAST, dejected.--_ns._ DOWN'COME, a fall, ruin,
a heavy pour of rain; DOWN'-DRAUGHT, a current of air downwards;
DOWN'-EAST'ER, one living 'down east' from the speaker, a New Englander,
and esp. an inhabitant of Maine; DOWN'FALL, fall, failure, humiliation,
ruin: a falling down, as of rain.--_adjs._ DOWN'FALLEN, ruined; DOWN'-GYVED
(_Shak._), hanging down like fetters.--_n._ DOWN'-HAUL, a rope by which a
jib, &c., is hauled down when set.--_adjs._ DOWN'-HEART'ED, dejected;
DOWN'HILL, descending, sloping.--_n._ DOWN'-LINE, the line of a railway
leading from the capital, or other important centre, to the
provinces.--_adj._ DOWN'LOOKED (_Dryden_), downcast, gloomy.--_ns._
DOWN'-LY'ING, time of retiring to rest: a woman's lying-in; DOWN'POUR, a
heavy fall of rain, &c.--_adv._ DOWN'RIGHT (_obs._), perpendicular: in
plain terms: utterly.--_adj._ plain spoken: brusque: utter (as in
_downright madness_).--_ns._ DOWN'RIGHTNESS; DOWN'RUSH, a rushing down (as
of gas, hot air, &c.); DOWN'-SET'TING, a setting down, a snub;
DOWN'-SIT'TING, sitting down, time of rest (Ps. cxxxix. 2).--_advs._
DOWN'STAIRS, in, or to, a lower story; DOWN'-STREAM, with the
current.--_ns._ DOWN'-THROW, act of throwing down, state of being thrown
down: a sinking of strata below the level of the surrounding beds;
DOWN'-TRAIN, a railway train proceeding from the chief terminus.--_adj._
DOWN'-TRODDEN, trampled on, tyrannised over.--_advs._ DOWN'WARD,
DOWN'WARDS, from higher to lower: from source to outlet: from more ancient
to modern: in the lower part.--_adj._ DOWN'WARD.--DOWN EAST (_U.S._), in or
into Maine and adjoining parts of New England; DOWN IN THE MOUTH, in low
spirits; DOWN ON ONE'S LUCK, in ill-luck; DOWN SOUTH, in the southern
states; DOWN TO THE COUNTRY, away into the country, from London (hence
'down to the Derby,' 'down to Scotland'); DOWN WITH YOUR MONEY, lay it
down, pay it.--A DOWN-TRAIN, a train away from London.--LAY DOWN THE LAW,
to expound authoritatively. [A corr. of M. E. _a-dawn_, _adun_--A.S. _of
dúne_, 'from the hill'--A.S. _dún_, a hill.]

DOWRY, dow'ri, _n._ the property which a woman brings to her husband at
marriage--sometimes used for _dower_. [See DOWER.]

DOWSE, dows, _v.t._ and _v.i._ See DOUSE.

DOWSE, dows, _v.i._ to use the divining-rod.--_n._ DOWS'ER, a water
diviner.

DOXOLOGY, doks-ol'o-ji, _n._ a hymn expressing praise and honour to the
Trinity.--_adj._ DOXOLOG'ICAL. [Gr. _doxologia_--_doxa_, praise, and
_legein_, to speak.]

DOXY, dok'si, _n._ (_Shak._) a mistress: a woman of loose character. [Prob.
conn. with East Fries. _dok_, a bundle, Low Ger. _dokke_.]

DOXY, dok'si, _n._ opinion--'Orthodoxy,' said Warburton, 'is my
doxy--heterodoxy is another man's doxy.' [Gr. _doxa_, opinion.]

DOYEN, dwaw'yong, _n._ dean, senior member (of an academy, diplomatic
corps, &c.). [Fr.,--Lat. _d[=e]canus_.]

DOYLEY. See DOILY.

DOZE, d[=o]z, _v.i._ to sleep lightly, or to be half-asleep: to be in a
dull or stupefied state.--_v.i._ to spend in drowsiness (with
_away_).--_n._ a short light sleep.--_adj._ DOZED, drowsy.--_v.t._
D[=O]'ZEN (_Scot._), to stupefy.--_v.i._ to become stupefied.--_ns._
D[=O]'ZER; D[=O]'ZINESS; D[=O]'ZING.--_adj._ D[=O]'ZY, drowsy. [From a
Scand. root, seen in Ice. _dúsa_, Dan. _döse_, to dose.]

DOZEN, duz'n, _adj._ two and ten, or twelve.--_n._ a collection of twelve
articles.--_adj._ DOZ'ENTH.--BAKER'S DOZEN, DEVIL'S DOZEN, thirteen. [O.
Fr. _dozeine_--L. _duodecim_--_duo_, two, and _decem_, ten.]

DRAB, drab, _n._ a low, sluttish woman: a whore.--_v.i._ to associate with
bad women.--_ns._ DRAB'BER, one who herds with drabs; DRAB'BINESS.--_adjs._
DRAB'BISH, DRAB'BY, sluttish. [Celt.; Gael. _drabag_; Ir. _drabog_, slut.]

DRAB, drab, _n._ thick, strong, gray cloth: a gray or dull-brown colour,
perh. from the muddy colour of undyed wool. [Fr. _drap_, cloth--Low L.
_drappus_, prob. Teut.]

DRABBET, drab'et, _n._ a coarse linen fabric made at Barnsley.

DRABBLE, drab'l, _v.t._ to besmear with mud and water.--_n._ DRABB'LING, a
manner of fishing for barbels with a rod and long line passed through a
piece of lead. [Cf. _drivel_, _dribble_; prob. conn. with _drab_, a low
woman.]

DRABBLER, drab'ler, _n._ an additional piece of canvas, laced to the bottom
of the bonnet of a sail, to give it greater depth.

DRACANTH, drak'anth, _n._ gum tragacanth.

DRACÆNA, dra-s[=e]'na, _n._ the tree which produces the resin called
Dragon's-blood.--_n._ DRAC[=I]'NA, the red resin of dragon's-blood used to
colour varnishes--also DRACINE', DRAC[=O]'NIN. [Low L. _dracæna_, a
she-dragon--Gr. _drakaina_, fem. of _drak[=o]n_, dragon.]

DRACHM, dram, _n._ See DRACHMA, DRAM.

DRACHMA, drak'ma, _n._ an ancient Greek weight, and silver coin of
different values: a modern Greek coin = above 9½d. sterling. [Gr.
_drachm[=e]_--_drassesthai_, to grasp with the hand.]

DRACO, dr[=a]'k[=o], _n._ a northern constellation: a dragon-lizard.

DRACONIAN, dra-k[=o]'nyan, _adj._ severe, as was the legislation, of
_Draco_, the Athenian archon (621 B.C.).--Also DRACON'IC.

DRACONTIUM, dr[=a]-kon'shi-um, _n._ a genus of American araceous plants:
the root of the skunk-cabbage. [Gr.,--_drak[=o]n_, a dragon.]

DRACUNCULUS, dr[=a]-kun'k[=u]-lus, _n._ a herbaceous genus of _Araceæ_; a
dragonet or goby of genus _Callionymus_: a genus of worms, the guinea-worm.
[L., dim, of _draco_, a dragon.]

DRAD, drad, _p.adj._ or _n._ form used by Spenser for _dread_ and
_dreaded_.

DRAFF, draf, _n._ dregs: the refuse of malt that has been brewed
from.--_adjs._ DRAFF'ISH, DRAFF'Y, worthless. [Prob. related to Dut.
_draf_, Ger. _träber_.]

DRAFT, dräft, _n._ anything drawn: a selection of men from an army, &c.: an
order for the payment of money: lines drawn for a plan: a rough sketch: the
depth to which a vessel sinks in water.--_v.t._ to draw an outline of: to
compose and write: to draw off: to detach.--_ns._ DRAFT'-BAR, a
swingle-tree, the bar to which the coupling of a railway-carriage is
attached; DRAFT'-HORSE, a horse used for drawing the plough, heavy loads,
&c., in distinction to a carriage or saddle horse; DRAFT'-OX, an ox used
for drawing loads; DRAFTS'MAN, one who draws plans or designs;
DRAFTS'MANSHIP. [A corr. of DRAUGHT.]

DRAFTS, dräfts, _n.pl._ a game. [See DRAUGHTS.]

DRAG, drag, _v.t._ to draw by force: to draw slowly: to pull roughly and
violently: to explore with a drag-net or hook.--_v.i._ to hang so as to
trail on the ground: to be forcibly drawn along: to move slowly and
heavily:--_pr.p._ drag'ging; _pa.p._ dragged.--_n._ a net or hook for
dragging along to catch things under water: a heavy harrow: a device for
guiding wood to the saw: a mail-coach: a long open carriage, with
transverse or side seats: a contrivance for retarding carriage-wheels in
going down slopes: any obstacle to progress: an artificial scent
(anise-seed, &c.) dragged on the ground for foxhounds trained to the
pursuit (DRAG'-HOUNDS) to follow: (_billiards_) a push somewhat under the
centre of the cue-ball, causing it to follow the object-ball a short
way.--_ns._ DRAG'-BAR, a strong iron bar for connecting railway-carriages
together--also DRAW'-BAR; DRAG'-BOLT, a strong bolt passing through the
drag-bar of railway-carriages, and serving to fasten the coupling;
DRAG'-CHAIN, the chain that connects engine and tender, or carriages and
wagons, with one another; DRAG'-MAN, a fisherman who uses a drag-net;
DRAG'-NET, a net to be dragged or drawn along the bottom of water to catch
fish; DRAGS'MAN, the driver of a drag or coach. [A.S. _dragan_; Ger.
_tragen_. Acc. to Curtius, nowise conn. with L. _trah[)e]re_.]

DRAGANTIN, dra-gan'tin, _n._ a mucilage obtained from gum tragacanth.

DRAGGLE, drag'l, _v.t._ or _v.i._ to make or become wet and dirty by
dragging along the ground.--_n._ DRAGG'LE-TAIL, a slut.--_adj._
DRAGG'LE-TAILED. [Freq. of _drag_, and a doublet of _drawl_.]

DRAGOMAN, drag'o-man, _n._ an interpreter or guide in Eastern
countries:--_pl._ DRAG'OMANS. [Fr., from Ar. _tarjumân_--_tarjama_, to
interpret. See TARGUM.]

DRAGON, drag'un, _n._ a fabulous winged serpent: the constellation Draco: a
fierce person: the flying lizard of the East Indies.--_ns._ DRAG'ONET, a
little dragon: a genus of fishes of the goby family; DRAG'ON-FLY, an insect
with a long body and brilliant colours.--_v.t._ DRAG'ONISE, to turn into a
dragon: to watch like a dragon.--_adjs._ DRAG'ONISH, DRAG'ON-LIKE.--_n._
DRAG'ONISM, watchful guardianship.--_adj._ DRAGONNÉ (_her._), like a dragon
in the hinder part, and a lion or the like in the fore part.--_ns._
DRAG'ON'S-BLOOD, the red resinous exudation of several kinds of trees in
the W. and E. Indies, used for colouring; DRAG'ON'S-HEAD, a plant of genus
_Dracocephalum_, of the mint family (_Labiatæ_): (_her._) tenné or tawny
when blazoning is done by the heavenly bodies; DRAG'ON-SHELL, a cowry;
DRAG'ON'S-WORT, tarragon or snake-weed; DRAG'ON-TREE (same as DRACÆNA).
[Fr.,--L. _draco_, _draconis_--Gr. _drak[=o]n_, from aorist of
_derk-esthai_, to look.]

DRAGONNADE, drag-on-[=a]d', _n._ the persecution of French Protestants
under Louis XIV. by raids of dragoons: abandonment of a place to the
violence of soldiers. [Fr., from _dragon_, dragoon.]

DRAGOON, dra-g[=oo]n', _n._ formerly a soldier trained to fight either on
horseback or on foot, now applied only to heavy cavalry as opposed to
hussars and lancers.--_v.t._ to give up to the rage of soldiers: to compel
by violent measures.--_n._ DRAGOON'-BIRD, the umbrella-bird. [Fr. See
DRAGON.]

DRAGSMAN. See DRAG.

DRAIL, dr[=a]l, _n._ the iron bow of a plough from which the traces draw: a
piece of lead round the shank of the hook in fishing.--_v.i._ to draggle.

DRAIN, dr[=a]n, _v.t._ to draw off by degrees: to filter: to clear of water
by drains: to make dry: to drink dry: to exhaust.--_v.i._ to flow off
gradually.--_n._ a watercourse: a ditch: a sewer: (_slang_) a drink:
exhausting expenditure.--_adj._ DRAIN'ABLE.--_ns._ DRAIN'AGE, the drawing
off of water by rivers or other channels: the system of drains in a town;
DRAIN'AGE-BASIN, the area of land which drains into one river;
DRAIN'AGE-TUBE, a tube of silver, india-rubber, glass, &c., introduced by a
surgeon into a wound or abscess to draw off pus, &c.; DRAIN'ER, a utensil
on which articles are placed to drain; DRAIN'ING-EN'GINE, a pumping-engine
for mines, &c.; DRAIN'ING-PLOUGH, a form of plough used in making drains;
DRAIN'-PIPE; DRAIN'-TILE; DRAIN'-TRAP, a contrivance for preventing the
escape of foul air from drains, but admitting the water into them. [A.S.
_dréahnigan_--_dragan_, to draw.]

DRAKE, dr[=a]k, _n._ the male of the duck.--_n._ DRAKE'STONE, a flat stone
thrown along the surface of water so as to graze it and then rebound. [Ety.
dub.; cf. prov. Ger. _draak_; O. High Ger. _antrahho_, Ger. _enterich_, the
first element usually explained as _eend_, _end_, _anut_, 'duck.']

DRAKE, dr[=a]k, _n._ a dragon: a fiery meteor: a beaked galley, or Viking
ship of war: an angler's name for species of _Ephemera_. [A.S. _draca_,
dragon--L. _draco_.]

DRAM, dram, _n._ a contraction of DRACHM: 1/16th of an oz. avoirdupois:
formerly, with apothecaries, 1/8th of an oz.: as much raw spirits as is
drunk at once.--_v.i._ to drink a dram.--_v.t._ to give a dram to.--_ns._
DRAM'-DRINK'ER; DRAM'-SHOP. [Through Fr. and L., from Gr. _drachm[=e]_. See
DRACHMA.]

DRAMA, dram'a, _n._ a story of human life and action represented by actors
imitating the language, dress, &c. of the original characters: a
composition intended to be represented on the stage: dramatic literature:
theatrical entertainment: a series of deeply interesting events.--_adjs._
DRAMATIC, -AL, belonging to the drama: appropriate to or in the form of a
drama: with the force and vividness of the drama.--_adv._
DRAMAT'ICALLY.--_n._ DRAMAT'ICISM.--_adj._ DRAM'AT[=I]SABLE.--_n._
DRAMATIS[=A]'TION, the act of dramatising: the dramatised version of a
novel or story.--_v.i._ DRAM'AT[=I]SE, to compose in, or turn into, the
form of a drama or play.--_n._ DRAM'ATIST, a writer of plays.--DRAM'ATIS
PERS[=O]'NÆ (-[=e]), the characters of a drama or play. [L.,--Gr. _drama_,
_dramatos_--_draein_, to do.]

DRAMATURGY, dram'a-tur-ji, _n._ the principles of dramatic composition:
theatrical art.--_ns._ DRAM'ATURGE, DRAM'ATURGIST, a playwright.--_adj._
DRAM'ATURGIC. [Through Fr. from Gr. _dramatourgia_, _dramatourgos_,
playwright--_drama_, and _ergon_, a work.]

DRAMMOCK, dram'ok, _n._ meal and water mixed raw.

DRANK, drangk, _pa.t._ of DRINK.

DRANT, drant, _v.i._ and _v.t._ (_prov._) to drawl, to drone.--_n._ a
droning tone.

DRAPER, dr[=a]p'[.e]r, _n._ one who deals in drapery or cloth:--_fem._
DRAP'ERESS.--_n._ DRAP-DE-BERRY, a woollen cloth, coming from _Berry_ in
France.--_v.t._ DRAPE, to cover with cloth.--_p.adj._ DRAP'ERIED,
draped.--_n._ DRAP'ERY, cloth goods: hangings of any kind: the draper's
business: (_art_) the representation of the dress of human figures.--_v.t._
to drape.--_n._ DRAP'ET (_Spens._), cloth, coverlet. [Fr.
_drapier_--_drap_, from a Teut. root. See DRAB.]

DRAPPIE, DRAPPY, drap'i, _n._ (_Scot._) a little drop, esp. of spirits.

DRASTIC, dras'tik, _adj._ active, powerful.--_n._ a medicine that purges
quickly or thoroughly.--_adv._ DRAS'TICALLY. [Gr. _drastikos_--_draein_, to
act, to do.]

DRAT, drat, _v.t._ a minced oath used to express vexation, as 'Drat the
boy!' [Aphetic from God rot!]

DRATCHELL, drach'el, _n._ (_prov._) a slut.--Also DROTCH'ELL.

DRAUGHT, dräft, _n._ act of drawing: force needed to draw: the act of
drinking: the quantity drunk at a time: outline of a picture: that which is
taken in a net by drawing: a chosen detachment of men: a current of air:
the depth to which a ship sinks in the water.--_v.t._ (more commonly
DRAFT), to draw out.--_n._ DRAUGHT'-EN'GINE, the engine over the shaft of a
coal-pit.--_n.pl._ DRAUGHT'-HOOKS, large iron hooks fixed on the cheeks of
a cannon-carriage.--_ns._ DRAUGHT'-HOUSE (_B._), a sink, privy;
DRAUGHT'INESS; DRAUGHT'-NET, a drag-net.--_n.pl._ DRAUGHTS, a game in which
two persons make alternate moves (_draughts_) on a checkered board, called
the DRAUGHT'BOARD, with pieces called DRAUGHTS'MEN--U.S. _checkers_, Scot.
_dambrod_.--_n._ DRAUGHTS'MAN (see DRAFTSMAN).--_adj._ DRAUGHT'Y, full of
draughts or currents of air. [M. E. _draht_--A.S. _dragan_, to draw. See
DRAG, _v._, and DRAW.]

DRAVE, dr[=a]v, old _pa.t._ of DRIVE.

DRAVIDIAN, dra-vid'i-an, _n._ of the non-Aryan stock to which the Tamil,
Telugu, Canarese, and Malay[=a]lam speaking peoples of Southern India
belong: of the languages of these races. [Sans. _Dr[=a]vida_, an ancient
province of Southern India.]

DRAW, draw, _v.t._ to pull along: to bring forcibly towards one: to entice,
attract: to coax into giving information: to make one express himself (also
to DRAW OUT A MAN): to inhale: to take out: to evoke or bring out by some
artifice: to extract by pulling: to cast lots: to extract the essence of:
to eviscerate (hang, _draw_, and quarter): to manufacture (wire) by drawing
through a small hole: to deduce: to lengthen: to extend to the full length
(as in drawing a bow): to force to appear (as a badger from its hole): to
receive (as revenues): to demand money by a draft: to make a picture of, by
lines drawn: to describe: to require a depth of water for floating.--_v.i._
to pull: to practise drawing: to move: to approach: to have a free current
(of a chimney):--_pa.t._ drew (dr[=oo]); _pa.p._ drawn.--_n._ the act of
drawing: anything drawn: a drawn or undecided game.--_adj._
DRAW'ABLE.--_ns._ DRAW'BACK, a disadvantage: a receiving back some part of
the duty on goods on their exportation; DRAW'-BAR (same as DRAG-BAR);
DRAW'-BOY, the boy who pulls the cords of the harness in figure-weaving, a
mechanical device for this purpose; DRAW'BRIDGE, a bridge that can be drawn
up or let down at pleasure; DRAW[=E][=E]', the person on whom a bill of
exchange is drawn; DRAW'ER, he or that which draws: one who draws beer or
fetches liquor in a tavern: a thing drawn out, like the sliding box in a
case: (_pl._) a close under-garment for the lower limbs; DRAW'-GEAR, the
apparatus by which railway-cars are coupled; DRAW'ING, the art of
representing objects by lines drawn, shading, &c.: a picture: the
distribution of prizes, as at a lottery; DRAW'ING-BOARD; DRAW'ING-FRAME, a
machine in which carded wool, cotton, or the like is drawn out fine;
DRAW'ING-KNIFE, a knife with a handle at each end, used by coopers for
shaving hoops by drawing it towards one; DRAW'ING-MAS'TER;
DRAW'ING-P[=A]'PER; DRAW'ING-PEN; DRAW'ING-PEN'CIL; DRAW'ING-ROOM, in
engineering, a room where plans and patterns are drawn; DRAW'ING-T[=A]'BLE,
a table which can be extended in length by drawing out sliding leaves;
DRAW'-NET (same as DRAG-NET); DRAW'-PLATE, a plate of steel or ruby with a
hole drilled in it through which wire, tubing, or the like is drawn to make
it more slender; DRAW'-WELL, a well from which water is drawn up by a
bucket and apparatus.--DRAW A BEAD ON (see BEAD); DRAW A BLANK (see BLANK);
DRAW A COVER, to send the hounds into a cover to frighten out a fox; DRAW
BLANK, to do so, but find no fox; DRAW BACK, to retire: to withdraw from an
engagement; DRAW CUTS, to cast lots; DRAW IN, to reduce, contract: to
become shorter; DRAW IT FINE, to be too precise; DRAW IT MILD, to state a
thing without exaggeration; DRAW NEAR, to approach; DRAW OFF, to take wine,
ale, &c. out of a barrel: to retire; DRAW ON, to approach (of a fixed
date); DRAW ON ONE'S IMAGINATION, to make imaginative or lying statements;
DRAW ON ONE'S MEMORY, to try to remember; DRAW OUT, to leave the place (of
an army), &c.; DRAW OVER, to persuade to desert to the other side; DRAW
REIN, to slacken speed, to stop; DRAW THE LINE, to fix a limit; DRAW UP, to
form in regular order: to arrange or to be arranged (as troops): to compose
(as a protest, &c.): to stop (as in driving a carriage).--IN DRAWING,
correctly drawn; OUT OF DRAWING, inaccurately drawn, or drawn in violation
of the principles of drawing. [A later form of DRAG.]

DRAWCANSIR, draw'kan-s[.e]r, _n._ a blustering fellow, a braggart. [The
name of a character in Buckingham's _Rehearsal_ (1671).]

DRAWING-ROOM, draw'ing-r[=oo]m, _n._ a room to which the company withdraws
after dinner: a reception of company at court.--DRAWING-ROOM CAR, a
railway-carriage fitted up as a drawing-room. [Orig. _Withdrawing-room_.]

DRAWL, drawl, _v.i._ (_obs._) to dawdle: to speak in a slow, lengthened
tone.--_v.t._ to utter (words) in a slow and sleepy manner.--_n._ a slow,
lengthened utterance.--_n._ DRAWL'ER.--_adv._ DRAWL'INGLY.--_n._
DRAWL'INGNESS. [Freq. of _draw_, as _draggle_ of _drag_.]

DRAWN, drawn, _part._ and _adj._ from DRAW, esp. in 'a drawn game or
battle,' undecided.--DRAWN AND QUARTERED, disembowelled and cut into
quarters.--AT DAGGERS DRAWN, openly hostile.

DRAY, dr[=a], _n._ a low strong cart for heavy goods; that which is dragged
or drawn.--_ns._ DRAY'AGE; DRAY'-HORSE; DRAY'MAN; DRAY'-PLOUGH. [A.S.
_dræge_, from _dragan_. See DRAG, _v._]

DRAZEL, dr[=a]z'el, _n._ (_prov._) a slut.

DREAD, dred, _n._ fear: awe: the objects that excite fear.--_adj._ dreaded:
inspiring great fear or awe.--_v.t._ to regard with terror: to regard with
reverence.--_adjs._ DREAD'ABLE; DREAD'FUL, (_orig._) full of dread:
producing great fear or awe: terrible.--_adv._ DREAD'FULLY.--_n._
DREAD'FULNESS.--_adj._ DREAD'LESS, free from dread: intrepid.--_adv._
DREAD'LESSLY.--_n._ DREAD'LESSNESS.--_adj._ DREAD'LY (_Spens._)
dreadful.--_ns._ DREAD'NAUGHT, DREAD'NOUGHT, one who dreads nothing--hence,
a garment of thick cloth defending against the weather: the cloth of which
it is made.--PENNY DREADFUL, a cheap sensational serial or tale, usually
bloody in subject and vulgar in tone. [M. E. _dreden_--A.S. _on-dr['æ]dan_,
to fear; Ice. _ondréda_, Old High Ger. _in-tratan_, to be afraid.]

DREAM, dr[=e]m, _n._ a train of thoughts and fancies during sleep, a
vision: something only imaginary.--_v.i._ to fancy things during sleep: to
think idly.--_v.t._ to see in, or as in, a dream:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._
dreamed or dreamt (dremt).--_ns._ DREAM'ER; DREAM'ERY, a place favourable
to dreams: dream-work.--_adj._ DREAM'FUL (_Tenn._), dreamy.--_n._
DREAM'HOLE, one of the holes in the walls of steeples, towers, &c., for
admitting light.--_adv._ DREAM'ILY.--_n._ DREAM'INESS.--_adv._
DREAM'INGLY.--_n._ DREAM'LAND, the land of dreams, reverie, or
imagination.--_adj._ DREAM'LESS, free from dreams.--_ns._ DREAM'WHILE, the
duration of a dream; DREAM'WORLD, a world of illusions.--_adj._ DREAM'Y,
full of dreams: appropriate to dreams: dream-like. [M. E. _dream_,
_dr[=e]m_, not recorded in A.S., but pointing to an assumed A.S. _dréam_,
cog. with O. High Ger. _troum_, O. Norse _draum_, &c. This is distinct from
the A.S. _dréam_, mirth, minstrelsy, being ultimately related to _dreug-_,
_draug-_, _drug-_, to deceive, the radical sense therefore 'illusion.']

DREAR, dr[=e]r, DREARY, dr[=e]r'i, _adj._ gloomy: cheerless.--_adv._
DREAR'ILY.--_ns._ DREAR'IMENT, DREAR'ING, DREAR'IHEAD, DREAR'IHOOD
(_Spens._), dreariness, cheerlessness; DREAR'INESS.--_adj._ DREAR'ISOME,
desolate, forlorn. [A.S. _dreórig_, mournful, bloody--_dreór_, gore.]

DREDGE, drej, _n._ an instrument for dragging: a drag-net for catching
oysters, &c.: a machine for taking up mud or zoological specimens from the
bottom of the sea: a floating machine for deepening a harbour or river by
gathering up mud from the bottom by means of buckets on an endless
chain--also DREDG'ER, DREDG'ING-MACHINE'.--_v.t._ DREDGE, to gather with a
dredge: to deepen with a dredge. [Conn. with _drag_.]

DREDGE, drej, _v.t._ to sprinkle flour on meat while roasting.--_ns._
DREDG'ER, DREDGE'-BOX, DREDG'ING-BOX, a utensil for dredging. [O. Fr.
_dragie_, sugar-plum, mixed grain for horses--Gr. _trag[=e]mata_, spices.]

DREE, dr[=e], _v.i._ to endure, bear, esp. in DREE ONE'S WEIRD, to abide
one's destiny. [Scot.; A.S. _dre[=o]gan_, suffer, perform; Prov. Eng.
_dree_, Scot. _dreich_, _dreigh_, all meaning wearisome.]

DREGS, dregz, _n.pl._ impurities in liquor that fall to the bottom, the
grounds: dross: the vilest part of anything.--_ns._ DREG'GINESS,
DREG'GISHNESS.--_adj._ DREG'GY, containing dregs: muddy: foul. [Prob.
Scand.; Ice. _dreggjar_.]

DREICH, dr[=e]h, _adj._ (_Scot._) long, tiresome. [See DREE.]

DRENCH, drensh, _v.t._ to fill with drink or liquid: to wet thoroughly: to
soak: to physic by force: (_obs._) to drown.--_n._ a draught: a dose of
physic forced down the throat.--_n._ DRENCH'ER. [A.S. _drencan_, to give to
drink, from _drincan_, to drink; Ger. _tränken_, to soak. See DRINK.]

DRENT, drent (_Spens._), obsolete _pa.t._ of DRENCH.

DRESS, dres, _v.t._ to put straight or in order, as troops: to put clothes
upon: to prepare: to cook: to trim: to deck: to cleanse a sore: to
manure.--_v.i._ to come into line: to put on clothes:--_pa.t._ and _pa.p._
dressed or drest.--_n._ the covering or ornament of the body: a lady's
gown: style of dress.--_ns._ DRESS'-CIR'CLE, part of a theatre (usually the
first gallery) set apart for people in evening dress; DRESS'-COAT, a fine
black coat with narrow or cut-away skirts, worn when in full dress;
DRESS'ER, one who dresses: a medical student who dresses wounds: a table on
which meat is dressed or prepared for use: a kind of kitchen sideboard with
rows of shelves for plates, dishes, &c.--_n.pl._ DRESS'-GOODS, cloths for
making women's and children's gowns, frocks, &c.--_ns._ DRESS'ING, dress or
clothes: manure given to land: matter used to give stiffness and gloss to
cloth: the sauce, &c., used in preparing a dish for the table, stuffing,
&c.: the bandage, &c., applied to a sore: an ornamental moulding: a
thrashing; DRESS'ING-CASE, a case of toilet requisites used in dressing
one's self: DRESS'ING-GOWN, a loose garment used in dressing, or in
deshabille; DRESS'ING-JACK'ET, DRESS'ING-SACK, a jacket worn by women in
dressing: DRESS'ING-ROOM; DRESS'ING-T[=A]'BLE; DRESS'MAKER, a person who
makes gowns or dresses for women.--_adj._ DRESS'Y, fond of dress.--EVENING
DRESS, FULL DRESS, the costume prescribed by fashion for evening
receptions, dinners, balls, &c. [O. Fr. _dresser_, to prepare--L.
_dirig[)e]re_, _directum_, to direct.]

DREST, drest, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of DRESS.

DREVILL, an old form of DRIVEL, a slave.

DREW, dr[=oo]--did draw--_pa.t._ of DRAW.

DRIB, drib, _v.t._ to cut off in small portions: to filch or steal: to lead
on by degrees. [Akin to DRUB.]

DRIBBLE, drib'l, _v.i._ to fall in small drops: to drop quickly: to slaver,
as a child or an idiot.--_v.t._ to let fall in drops: to give out in small
portions: at football, &c., to keep the ball moving forward little by
little.--_v.t._ DRIB, to dribble, drivel.--_n._ a driblet.--_ns._
DRIB'BLER; DRIB'LET, DRIB'BLET, a small drop: a small quantity. [Dim. of
DRIP.]

DRICKSIE. See DROXY.

DRIER, dr[=i]'[.e]r, _n._ that which dries: a machine for extracting
moisture from wet cloths, grain, &c.: a substance causing paint to dry more
rapidly.

DRIFT, drift, _n._ a driving: a heap of matter driven together, as snow:
the direction in which a thing is driven: a slow current in the sea caused
by the wind: leeway: the object aimed at: the meaning of words used:
(_geol._) detritus, such as broken rock, sand, gravel: (_mining_) a
horizontal excavation or passage.--_v.t._ to drive into heaps, as
snow.--_v.i._ to be floated along: to be driven into heaps.--_ns._
DRIFT'AGE, that which is drifted: the amount of deviation from a ship's
course due to leeway; DRIFT'-AN'CHOR, an anchor for keeping the ship's head
to the wind; DRIFT'-BOLT, a steel bolt used to drive out other bolts;
DRIFT'-ICE, floating masses of ice drifting before the wind; DRIFT'LAND, an
old tribute paid for the privilege of driving cattle through a
manor.--_adj._ DRIFT'LESS, without drift or aim.--_ns._ DRIFT'-MIN'ING,
gold-mining by means of drifts in the gravel and detritus of old
river-beds; DRIFT'-NET, a net kept upright in the water by floats above and
weights below; DRIFT'-SAIL, a sail immersed in the water, used for
lessening the drift of a vessel during a storm; DRIFT'-WAY, a road over
which cattle were driven: (_min._) drift; DRIFT'-WEED, gulf-weed: tangle;
DRIFT'-WOOD, wood drifted by water.--_adj._ DRIFT'Y, full of or forming
drifts. [See DRIVE.]

DRILL, dril, _v.t._ to bore, pierce: to make with a drill: to exercise
soldiers, pupils, &c.--to sow seeds, &c., in rows.--_n._ an instrument for
boring stone, metal, teeth, or hard substances (not wood), actuated by a
kind of bow, by a brace, or otherwise: a large boring instrument used in
mining: a ridge with seed or growing plants on it (turnips, potatoes, &c.):
the plants in such a row: the machine for sowing the seed in
drill-husbandry.--_ns._ DRILL'-BAR'ROW, a grain-drill driven by hand;
DRILL'-HAR'ROW, a harrow for working between drills; DRILL'-HUS'BANDRY, the
method of sowing seed in drills or rows; DRILL'ING-MACHINE',
DRILL'ING-LATHE, DRILL'-PRESS, machines for boring with a drill or drills;
DRILL'-MAS'TER, one who teaches drill, one who trains in anything, esp. in
a mechanical manner; DRILL'-PLOUGH, a plough for sowing grain in drills;
DRILL'-SER'GEANT, a sergeant who drills soldiers. [Prob. borrowed from Dut.
_drillen_, to bore; _dril_, _drille_, a borer.]

DRILL, dril, _n._ a species of baboon found in Western Africa, resembling
the mandrill, but smaller. [A contr. of _mandrill_.]

DRILLING, dril'ing, _n._ stout twilled linen or cotton cloth.--Also DRILL.
[Ger. _drillich_, ticking--L. _trilix_, three-threaded; _tres_, three,
_licium_, thread.]

DRILY, same as DRYLY. See under DRY, _adj._

DRINK, dringk, _v.t._ to swallow, as a liquid: to empty, as a glass, bowl,
&c.: to take in through the senses.--_v.i._ to swallow a liquid: to take
intoxicating liquors to excess:--_pr.p._ drink'ing; _pa.t._ drank; _pa.p._
drunk.--_n._ something to be drunk: intoxicating liquor.--_adj._
DRINK'ABLE.--_ns._ DRINK'ABLENESS; DRINK'ER, a tippler; DRINK'-HAIL, the
customary old English reply to a pledge in drinking (_wæs hail_, 'health or
good luck to you,' was answered with _drinc hail_, 'drink good health or
good luck'); DRINK'ING-BOUT; DRINK'ING-FOUNT'AIN; DRINK'ING-HORN;
DRINK'-MON'EY, a gratuity, ostensibly given to buy liquor for drinking to
the health of the giver; DRINK'-OFF'ERING, an offering of wine, oil, blood,
&c. to God or the gods.--DRINK HIMSELF DRUNK, to drink until he is drunk;
DRINK IN, to absorb rain, &c., as dry land does; DRINK OFF, to quaff wholly
and at a gulp; DRINK THE OTHERS UNDER THE TABLE, to continue drinking and
remain (comparatively) sober after the others have completely collapsed;
DRINK TO, DRINK TO THE HEALTH OF, to drink wine, &c., with good wishes for
one's health; DRINK UP, to exhaust by drinking.--IN DRINK,
intoxicated.--STRONG DRINK, alcoholic liquor. [A.S. _drincan_; Ger.
_trinken_.]

[Illustration]

DRIP, drip, _v.i._ to fall in drops: to let fall drops.--_v.t._ to let fall
in drops:--_pr.p._ drip'ping; _pa.p._ dripped.--_n._ a falling in drops:
that which falls in drops: the edge of a root.--_ns._ DRIP'PING, that which
falls in drops, as fat from meat in roasting; DRIP'PING-PAN, a pan for
receiving the dripping from roasting meat; DRIP'-STONE, a projecting
moulding over doorways, &c., to throw off the rain.--RIGHT OF DRIP, right
in law to let the drip from one's roof fall on another's land. [A.S.
_dryppan_--_dréopan_.]

DRIVE, dr[=i]v, _v.t._ to force along: to hurry one on: to guide, as horses
drawing a carriage: to convey or carry in a carriage: to force in, as nails
with a hammer: to push briskly: to urge, as a point of argument, a bargain,
&c.: to compel: to send away with force, as a ball in cricket, golf,
tennis: to chase game towards sportsmen.--_v.i._ to press forward with
violence: to be forced along, as a ship before the wind: to go in a
carriage: to tend towards a point: to strike at with a sword, the fist,
&c.:--_pr.p._ dr[=i]v'ing; _pa.t._ dr[=o]ve; _pa.p._ driv'en.--_n._ an
excursion in a carriage: a road for driving on: the propelling of a ball in
cricket, &c.: the chasing of game towards the shooters, or the sport so
obtained, or the ground over which the game is driven: urgent pressure:
pushing the sale of a special article by reduction of prices.--_ns._
DRIV'ER, one who or that which drives, in all senses: a club used in golf
to propel the ball from the teeing-ground; DRIV'ING-BAND, the band or strap
which communicates motion from one machine, or part of a machine, to
another; DRIV'ING-SHAFT, a shaft from a driving-wheel communicating motion,
to machinery; DRIV'ING-WHEEL, a main wheel that communicates motion to
other wheels: one of the main wheels in a locomotive.--DRIVE FEATHERS,
DOWN, to separate the lighter from the heavier by exposing them to a
current of air.--DRIVE TO ONE'S WITS' END, to perplex utterly.--LET DRIVE,
to aim a blow. [A.S _drífan_, to drive; Ger. _treiben_, to push.]

DRIVEL, driv'l, _v.i._ to slaver like a child: to be foolish: to speak like
an idiot:--_pr.p._ driv'elling; _pa.p._ driv'elled.--_n._ slaver:
nonsense.--_n._ DRIV'ELLER, a fool. [M. E. _drevelen_, _dravelen_; related
to DRIBBLE.]

DRIVEL, driv'l, _n._ (_Spens._) a drudge. [Cf. Old Dut. _drevel_, a
scullion.]

DRIZZLE, driz'l, _v.i._ to rain in small drops.--_v.t._ (_Shak._) to shed
in small drops.--_n._ a small, light rain.--_adj._ DRIZZ'LY. [Freq. of M.
E. _dresen_--A.S. _dreósan_, to fall; Norw. _drjosa_, Goth. _driusan_.]

DROGER, DROGHER, dr[=o]'ger, _n._ a West Indian coasting vessel, with long
masts and lateen sails.

DROGUE, dr[=o]g, _n._ the drag of boards, attached to the end of a
harpoon-line, checking the progress of a running whale.

DROGUET, dr[=o]-g[=a]', _n._ a ribbed woollen dress fabric, a variety of
rep. [Fr.]

DROICH, dr[=o]h, _n._ a dwarf.--_adj._ DROICH'Y, dwarfish. [Gael.]

DROIL, droil, _v.i._ to drudge. [Dut. _druilen_, to loiter.]

DROIT, drwa, _n._ right; duty. [Fr.]

DROLL, dr[=o]l, _adj._ odd: amusing: laughable.--_n._ one who excites
mirth: a jester.--_v.i._ to practise drollery: to jest.--_ns._ DROLL'ERY;
DROLL'ING.--_adjs._ DROLL'ISH, rather droll; DROLL'Y. [Fr., prob. from Dut.
_drollig_, odd--_trold_, a hobgoblin; cf. Ger. _droll_, a short thick
person.]

DROMEDARY, drum'e-dar-i, _n._ a thoroughbred one-humped Arabian
camel.--_ns._ DROMED[=A]'RIAN, DROM'EDARIST. [Fr.,--Low L.
_dromedarius_--Gr. _dromas_, _dromados_, running--_dramein_, 2 aor. infin.
of _trechein_, to run.]

DROMOND, drom'ond, _n._ a swift medieval ship of war.--Also DROM'ON. [O.
Fr.,--Late L. _dromo_--Gr. _dromon_--_dromos_, a running, _dramein_, to
run.]

DROMOS, drom'os, _n._ a Greek race-course: an entrance-passage or avenue,
as to a subterranean treasury, &c.--_adjs._ DROM'IC, -AL, pertaining to a
race-course: basilican. [Gr.,--_dramein_, to run.]

DRONE, dr[=o]n, _n._ the male of the honey-bee: one who lives on the labour
of others, like the drone-bee: a lazy, idle fellow.--_adj._ DRON'ISH, like
a drone: lazy, idle.--_adv._ DRON'ISHLY.--_n._ DRON'ISHNESS.--_adv._
DRON'Y. [A.S. _drán_, the bee; Dan. _drone_.]

DRONE, dr[=o]n, _v.i._ to make a low humming sound.--_n._ the bass-pipe of
a bagpipe.--_n._ DRONE'-PIPE, a pipe producing a droning sound. [M. E.
_drounen_, to roar; not found in A.S. Cf. Dut. _dreunen_, Ger. _dröhnen_.]

DROOL, drool, _v.i._ to slaver--a form of DRIVEL.

DROOP, dr[=oo]p, _v.i._ to sink or hang down: to grow weak or faint: to
decline.--_v.t._ to let sink.--_n._ a drooping position.--_adv._
DROOP'INGLY, in a drooping manner. [Ice. _drúpa_, to droop. See DROP.]

DROP, drop, _n._ a small particle of liquid which falls at one time: a very
small quantity of liquid: anything hanging like a drop: a fall: a trap in
the gallows scaffold, the fall of which allows the criminal to drop: a
device for lowering goods into a ship's hold.--_v.i._ to fall in small
particles: to let drops fall: to fall suddenly: to come to an end: to fall
or sink lower.--_v.t._ to let fall in drops: to let fall: to let go,
dismiss, break off, as an acquaintance: to utter casually: to write and
send (a note) in an off-hand manner: to set down from a carriage:--_pr.p._
drop'ping; _pa.p._ dropped.--_ns._ DROP'-DRILL, an apparatus for dropping
seed and manure into the soil simultaneously; DROP'-HAMM'ER, DROP'-PRESS, a
swaging, stamping, or forging machine having either a regular or
intermittent motion; DROP'LET, a little drop; DROP'-LETT'ER (_U.S._), a
letter posted in any place merely for local delivery; DROP'-NET, a net
suspended from a boom, to be suddenly dropped on a passing shoal of fish;
DROP'PING, that which is dropped: (_pl._) dung, esp. of fowls.--_adj._
DROP'-RIPE, so ripe as to be ready to drop from the tree.--_ns._
DROP'-SCENE, a painted curtain suspended by pulleys, which drops in front
of the stage in a theatre; DROP'-STONE, a stalactic variety of
calcite.--_adv._ DROP'-WISE (_Tenn._), by drops.--_n._ DROP'-WORT, the
_Spiræa Filipendula_.--DROP ASTERN (_naut._), to pass or move towards the
stern; DROP AWAY, OFF, to depart, disappear; DROP DOWN, to sail, move, or
row down a coast, or down a river to the sea; DROP IN, to come in casually;
DROP OUT, to disappear from one's place; DROP SERENE, an old medical name
for _amaurosis_, literally translated from L. _gutta serena_.--A DROPPING
FIRE, a continuous irregular discharge of small-arms.--PRINCE RUPERT'S
DROPS, drops of glass which have fallen in a melted state into cold water,
and have assumed a tadpole-like shape, the whole falling to dust with a
loud report if the point of the tail be nipped off. [A.S. _dropa_, a
drop--_dreópan_, to drop; Dut. _drop_, Ger. _tropfe_.]

DROPSY, drop'si, _n._ an unnatural collection of water in any part of the
body.--_adjs._ DROP'SICAL, DROP'SIED (_Shak._), affected with dropsy.--_n._
DROP'SICALNESS. [Through Fr. from L. _hydropisis_--Gr.
_hydr[=o]ps_--_hyd[=o]r_, water.]

DROSERA, dros'er-a, _n._ a genus of small herbaceous plants of the order
_Droseraceæ_, generally inhabiting marshy places. [Formed from Gr.
_droseros_--_drosos_, dew.]

DROSHKY, drosh'ki, DROSKY, dros'ki, _n._ a low four-wheeled open carriage
much used in Russia. [Russ. _drozhki_.]

DROSOMETER, dr[=o]-som'e-ter, _n._ an instrument for measuring the quantity
of dew condensed on the surface of a body left in the open air. [Gr.
_drosos_, dew, _metron_, measure.]

DROSS, dros, _n._ the scum which metals throw off when melting: waste
matter: refuse: rust.--_n._ DROSS'INESS.--_adj._ DROSS'Y, like dross:
impure: worthless. [A.S. _drós_, from _dreósan_, to fall; cf. Dut.
_droesem_; Ger. _druse_.]

DROUGHT, drowt, DROUTH, drowth, _n._ dryness: want of rain or of water:
thirst.--_ns._ DROUGHT'INESS, DROUTH'INESS.--_adjs._ DROUGHT'Y, DROUTH'Y,
full of drought: very dry: wanting rain, thirsty. [A.S. _drúgathe_,
dryness--_drúgian_, to dry.]

DROUK, DROOK, dr[=oo]k, _v.t._ to drench: (_Scot._) to duck.--_p.adjs._
DROUK'IT, DROOK'IT. [Ice. _drukna_, to be drowned; cf. Dan. _drukne_.]

DROVE, dr[=o]v, _pa.t._ of DRIVE.--_n._ a number of cattle, or other
animals, driven.--_n._ DROV'ER, one whose occupation is to drive cattle:
(_Spens._) a boat. [A.S. _dráf_--_drífan_, to drive.]

DROW, drow, _n._ a kind of elves supposed to belong to Shetland, inhabiting
caves--also TROW, a variant of _troll_.

DROW, drow, _n._ (_Scot._) a drizzling mist.

DROWN, drown, _v.t._ to drench or sink in water: to kill by placing under
water: to overpower: to extinguish.--_v.t._ to be suffocated in water.
[A.S. _druncnian_, to drown--_druncen_, pa.p. of _drincan_, to drink. See
DRENCH.]

DROWSE, drowz, _v.i._ to be heavy with sleep: to look heavy and
dull.--_v.t._ to make heavy with sleep: to stupefy.--_n._ a half-sleeping
state.--_ns._ DROWS'IHEAD, DROWS'IHED (_Spens._), drowsiness,
sleepiness.--_adv._ DROWS'ILY.--_n._ DROWS'INESS.--_adj._ DROWS'Y, sleepy:
heavy: dull: inducing sleep. [A.S. _drúsian_, to be sluggish; Dut.
_dreósen_, to fall asleep.]

DRUB, drub, _v.t._ to beat or thrash:--_pr.p._ drub'bing; _pa.p._
drubbed.--_n._ DRUB'BING, a cudgelling. [Murray suggests Ar. _daraba_, to
beat, bastinado, _darb_, a beating.]

DRUDGE, druj, _v.i._ to work hard: to do very mean work.--_n._ one who
works hard: a slave: a menial servant.--_ns._ DRUDG'ER; DRUDG'ERY,
DRUDG'ISM, the work of a drudge: uninteresting toil: hard or humble
labour.--_adv._ DRUDG'INGLY. [Ety. unknown. Some suggest Celt., as in Ir.
_drugaire_, a drudge.]

DRUG, drug, _n._ any substance used in the composition of medicine: an
article that cannot be sold, generally owing to overproduction.--_v.t._ to
mix or season with drugs: to dose to excess.--_v.i._ to prescribe drugs or
medicines:--_pr.p._ drug'ging; _pa.p._ drugged.--_n._ DRUG'GIST, one who
deals in drugs. [O. Fr. _drogue_, prob. from Dut. _droog_, dry; as if
applied orig. to dried herbs.]

DRUG, drug, _n._ (_Shak._) a drudge.

DRUGGET, drug'et, _n._ a woven and felted coarse woollen fabric, chiefly
used for covering carpets--hence called in some parts of Britain
_crumbcloth_. [O. Fr. _droguet_, dim. of _drogue_, a drug, trash. See
above.]

DRUID, dr[=oo]'id, _n._ a priest among the ancient Celts of Britain, Gaul,
and Germany, who worshipped under oak-trees: a member of a benefit society
(founded 1781), its lodges called _groves_:--_fem._ DRU'IDESS.--_adjs._
DRUID'IC, -AL, DRU'IDISH.--_n._ DRU'IDISM, the doctrines which the Druids
taught: the ceremonies they practised. [L. pl. _druidæ_--Celt.
_druid_--whence Old Ir. _drai_, Ir. and Gael. _draoi_, magician. Littré
accepts the ety. from Celt. _derw_, an oak, which is from the same root as
Gr. _drys_, an oak.]

DRUM, drum, _n._ an instrument of percussion, in which a skin of parchment,
stretched on a frame of wood or metal, is beaten with an instrument called
a drumstick: anything shaped like a drum: the tympanum or middle portion of
the ear: (_archit._) the upright part of a cupola: (_mech._) a revolving
cylinder: formerly a large and tumultuous evening party (said to be so
called because rival hostesses vied with each other in beating up crowds of
guests).--_v.i._ to beat a drum: to beat with the fingers.--_v.t._ to drum
out, to expel: to summon:--_pr.p._ drum'ming; _pa.p._ drummed.--_ns._
DRUM'HEAD, the head of a drum (see COURT-MARTIAL): the top part of a
capstan; DRUM'-M[=A]'JOR, the chief drummer of a regiment (now called
_sergeant-drummer_); DRUM'MER, one who drums: (_U.S._) a commercial
traveller; DRUM'STICK, the stick with which the drum is beat: the leg of a
cooked fowl. [From a Teut. root found in Dut. _trom_, Ger. _trommel_, a
drum; prob. imit.]

DRUM, drum, _n._ a small hill or ridge of hills, used in many place-names,
as _Drum_glass, _Drum_sheugh, &c. [Ir. _druim_, the back.]

DRUMBLE, drum'bl, _v.i._ (_Shak._) to be sluggish.

DRUMLY, drum'li, _adj._ (_Scot._) muddy: gloomy.

DRUMMOCK, drum'ok. Same as DRAMMOCK (q.v.).

DRUMMOND-LIGHT, drum'ond-l[=i]t, _n._ the lime-light or oxy-hydrogen light
invented by Captain T. _Drummond_ (1797-1840). [See LIME-LIGHT.]

DRUNK, drungk, _pa.p._ of DRINK.--_p.adj._ intoxicated: saturated.--_n._ a
drunken bout: a drunk person.--_n._ DRUNK'ARD, one who frequently drinks to
excess: a habitual drinker.--_p.adj._ DRUNK'EN, given to excessive
drinking: worthless, besotted: resulting from intoxication.--_adv._
DRUNK'ENLY.--_n._ DRUNK'ENNESS, excessive drinking: habitual intemperance.

DRUPE, dr[=oo]p, _n._ a fleshy fruit containing a stone, as the plum,
&c.--_adj._ DRUP[=A]'CEOUS, producing or pertaining to drupes or
stone-fruits.--_n._ DRUP'EL, a little drupe. [L. _drupa_--Gr. _dryppa_, an
over-ripe olive--_drypep[=e]s_, ripened on the tree, from _drys_, a tree,
and _peptein_, to cook; cf. _drupet[=e]s_--_drys_, and _piptein_, to fall.]

DRUSE, dr[=oo]s, _n._ (_mining_) a rock cavity lined with crystals, a geode
or _vug_. [Ger.]

DRUSE, dr[=oo]s, _n._ one of a remarkable people inhabiting a mountainous
district in the north of Syria, with a peculiar religion interwoven from
the Bible and the Koran.--_adj._ DRUS'IAN.

DRUXY, druk'si, _adj._ of timber, having decayed spots concealed by healthy
wood.--Also DRICK'SIE.

DRY, dr[=i], _adj._ free from, deficient in, moisture, sap: not green: not
giving milk: thirsty: uninteresting: (_obs._) hard: frigid, precise: free
from sweetness and fruity flavour (of wines, &c.).--_v.t._ to free from
water or moisture: to exhaust.--_v.i._ to become dry, to evaporate
entirely--both used also with prep. _up_:--_pr.p._ dry'ing; _pa.p._
dried.--_n._ and _adj._ DRY'ASDUST, the pretended editor or introducer of
some of Scott's novels--a synonym for a dull and pedantic though learned
person.--_v.t._ DRY'-BEAT (_Shak._), to beat severely, or so as to be
dry.--_ns._ DRY'-BOB, a slang name used at Eton for boys who play cricket,
football, &c.--opp. to the _Wet-bob_, who makes rowing his recreation;
DRY'-DOCK (see DOCK).--_adj._ DRY'-EYED, tearless.--_n._ DRY'-FOOT
(_Shak._), like a dog which pursues game by the scent of its foot.--_n.pl._
DRY'-GOODS, drapery, &c., as distinguished from groceries, hardware,
&c.--_n._ DRY'-LIGHT, a clear, unobstructed light: an unprejudiced
view.--_advs._ DRY'LY, DR[=I]'LY.--_ns._ DRY'-MEAS'URE (see MEASURE);
DRY'NESS; DRY'-NURSE, a nurse who feeds a child without milk from the
breast; DRY'-PLATE, a sensitised photographic plate, with which a picture
may be made without the preliminary use of a bath; DRY'-POINT, a sharp
needle by which fine lines are drawn in copperplate engraving; DRY'-ROT, a
decay of timber caused by fungi which reduce it to a dry, brittle mass:
(_fig._) a concealed decay or degeneration.--_v.t._ DRY'-SALT, to cure meat
by salting and drying.--_ns._ DRY'SALTER, a dealer in gums, dyes, drugs,
&c.: (_obs._) or in salted or dry meats, pickles, &c.; DRY'SALTERY.--_adj._
DRY'-SHOD, without wetting the shoes or feet.--_n._ DRY'-STEAM, steam
containing no unevaporated water.--_adj._ DRY'-STONE, built of stone
without mortar, as some walls.--_n._ DRY'-STOVE, a kind of hot-house for
preserving the plants of dry, warm climates.--CUT AND DRIED (see
CUT).--HIGH AND DRY (see HIGH). [A.S. _dr['y]ge_; cf. Dut. _droog_, Ger.
_trocken_.]

DRYAD, dr[=i]'ad, _n._ (_Greek myth._) a nymph of the woods: a forest-tree.
[Gr. _dryas_, from _drys_, a tree.]

DUAL, d[=u]'al, _adj._ consisting of two.--_ns._ D[=U]'AD, a pair of
objects looked at as one; D[=U]'AL-CONTROL', any joint control or
jurisdiction, as of England and France in Egypt; D[=U]'ALISM (_philos._),
that view which seeks to explain the world by the assumption of two
radically independent and absolute elements--e.g. (1) the doctrine of the
entire separation of spirit and matter, thus being opposed both to
_idealism_ and to _materialism_; (2) the doctrine of two distinct
principles of good and of evil, or of two distinct divine beings of these
characters; D[=U]'ALIST, a believer in dualism.--_adj._ DUALIS'TIC,
consisting of two: relating to dualism.--_ns._ DUAL'ITY, doubleness: state
of being double; D[=U]'AL-SCHOOL, a school for both boys and girls;
D[=U]'ARCHY, government by two. [L.,--_duo_, two.]

DUALIN, d[=u]-al'in, _n._ an explosive compound of sawdust, saltpetre, and
nitro-glycerine.

DUAN, d[=u]'an, _n._ a division of a poem, canto. [Gael.]

DUB, dub, _v.t._ to confer knighthood, from the ceremony of striking the
shoulder with the flat of a sword: to confer any name or dignity: to smooth
with an adze: to rub a softening and waterproof mixture into, as leather:
to dress a fly for fishing:--_pr.p._ dub'bing; _pa.p._ dubbed.--_n._
DUB'BING, the accolade: a preparation of grease for softening leather--also
DUB'BIN. [Conn. with O. Fr. _a-douber_, to equip with arms; but O. Fr.
_dober_ may be Teut.]

DUB, dub, _n._ (_Scot._) a pool of foul water: a puddle.

DUBIOUS, d[=u]'bi-us, _adj._ doubtful: undetermined: causing doubt: of
uncertain event or issue.--_adv._ D[=U]'BIOUSLY.--_ns._ D[=U]'BIOUSNESS,
DUB[=I]'ETY, DUBIOS'ITY, doubtfulness. [L. _dubius_.]

DUBITATE, d[=u]'bi-t[=a]t, _v.i._ to doubt, hesitate.--_adj._
D[=U]'BITABLE.--_ns._ D[=U]'BITANCY, DUBIT[=A]'TION.--_adj._
D[=U]'BITATIVE.--_adv._ D[=U]'BITATIVELY. [L. _dubiti[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_.]

DUCAL, d[=u]'kal, _adj._ pertaining to a duke.--_adv._ D[=U]'CALLY.

DUCAT, duk'at, _n._ a gold coin, formerly much used on the Continent, its
commonest value being about 9s. 4d., though there were silver ducats in
Italy worth 3s. 4d.--_n._ DUCATOON', an old silver coin in Venice and
elsewhere, worth 5 to 6 shillings. [O. Fr. _ducat_--It.
_ducato_--_ducatus_, a duchy. The name was applied to an Apulian silver
coin of 1140. The first gold ducat struck at Venice in 1284 bore the
legend--'Sit tibi Christe datus quem tu regis iste _Ducatus_' ('Be this
duchy, which thou rulest, dedicated to thee, O Christ'), which may have
helped to spread the name, though it did not originate it.]

DUCHY, duch'i, _n._ the territory of a duke, a dukedom.--_ns._ DUCH'ESS,
the consort or widow of a duke; DUCH'Y-COURT, the court of a duchy, esp.
that of the duchy of Lancaster.

DUCK, duk, _n._ a kind of coarse cloth for small sails, sacking, &c. [Dut.
_doeck_, linen cloth; Ger. _tuch_.]

DUCK, duk, _v.t._ to dip for a moment in water.--_v.i._ to dip or dive: to
lower the head suddenly: to cringe, yield.--_n._ a quick plunge, dip: a
quick lowering of the head or body, a jerky bow.--_ns._ DUCK'ER, one who
ducks: a diving-bird; DUCK'ING; DUCK'ING-POND; DUCK'ING-STOOL, a stool or
chair in which scolds were formerly tied and ducked in the water as a
punishment. [A.S. _dúcan_, to duck, dive; Ger. _tauchen_, Dut. _duiken_.]

DUCK, duk, _n._ name given to any member of the family _Anatidæ_, the
prominent marks of which are short webbed feet, with a small hind-toe not
reaching the ground, the netted scales in front of the lower leg, and the
long bill: the female duck as distinguished from the male _drake_: in
cricket (originally _duck's egg_), the zero (0), which records in a
scoring-sheet that a player has made no runs: (_coll._) a darling,
sweetheart: a financial defaulter--esp. LAME DUCK: also of things.--_ns._
DUCK'-ANT, a Jamaican termite nesting in trees; DUCK'-BILL, an aquatic
burrowing and egg-laying Australian mammal, about 18 inches long, with soft
fur, broadly webbed feet, and depressed duck-like bill--also called
_Duck-mole_, _Platypus_, and _Ornithorhynchus_.--_adj._ DUCK'-BILLED,
having a bill like a duck.--_n._ DUCK'-HAWK, the moor-buzzard or
marsh-harrier: the peregrine falcon of the United States.--_adj._
DUCK'-LEGGED, short-legged.--_ns._ DUCK'LING, a young duck; DUCK'S'-FOOT,
the lady's mantle; DUCK'-WEED, a name for several species of _Lemna_ and
_Wolffia_ growing in ditches; BOMBAY DUCK, bummals; WILD'-DUCK, the
mallard.--BREAK ONE'S DUCK (_cricket_), to make one's first run (see
above); MAKE, PLAY, DUCKS AND DRAKES, to use recklessly: squander, waste
(with _with_, _of_)--from the skipping of a flat stone across the surface
of water. [A.S. _duce_, a duck, from, _dúcan_, to duck, dive.]

DUCT, dukt, _n._ a tube conveying fluids in animal bodies or plants. [L.
_ductus_--_duc[)e]re_, to lead.]

DUCTILE, duk'til, _adj._ easily led: yielding: capable of being drawn out
into threads.--_ns._ DUCTILIM'ETER, an instrument for measuring the
ductility of metals; DUCTIL'ITY, capacity of being drawn out without
breaking. [Fr.,--L. _ductilis_--_duc[)e]re_, to lead.]

DUD, dud, _n._ (_coll._) in _pl._ poor or ragged clothes, tatters.--_n._
DUD'DERY, a shop where old clothes are sold, rags collectively.--_adj._
DUD'DY, ragged. [There is a M. E. _dudd_, birrus, a cloak, which may be
Celt.]

DUDDER, dud'er, _n._ (_prov._) confusion.

DUDE, d[=u]d, _n._ (_slang_) a fop or dandy, esp. remarkable for the
exquisite make and quality of his clothes.--_adj._ D[=U]'DISH.--_n._
D[=U]'DISM. [Hardly from _dud_.]

DUDEEN, d[=u]-d[=e]n', _n._ a short clay tobacco-pipe.

DUDGEON, duj'un, _n._ resentment: grudge. [There is an Anglo-Fr. _digeon_,
wood hafts of knives, &c., but a connection cannot be stated. Skeat
suggests dubiously W. _dygen_, malice, _dychan_, a jeer.]

DUDGEON, duj'un, _n._ the haft of a dagger: a small dagger. [See above.]

DUE, d[=u], _adj._ owed: that ought to be paid or done to another: proper:
appointed, under engagement to be ready, arrive, &c.--_adv._ exactly:
directly.--_n._ that which is owed: what one has a right to: perquisite:
fee or tribute.--_adj._ DUE'FUL (_Spens._), proper, fit.--GIVE THE DEVIL
HIS DUE, to give a fair hearing or fair-play to one of notorious character.
[O. Fr. _deu_, pa.p. of _devoir_--L. _deb[=e]re_, to owe.]

DUE, d[=u], _v.t._ (_Shak._) to endue.

DUEL, d[=u]'el, _n._ a combat between two persons, prearranged, and fought
under fixed conditions, generally on an affair of honour--happily harmless
in France: any fight or struggle between two parties: single combat to
decide a quarrel.--_v.i._ to fight in a duel:--_pr.p._ d[=u]'elling;
_pa.p._ d[=u]'elled.--_ns._ D[=U]'ELLER, D[=U]'ELLIST; D[=U]'ELLING,
fighting in a duel: the practice of fighting in single combat; DUELL'O, a
duel: the laws which regulate duelling.--_adj._ D[=U]'ELSOME, given to
duelling. [It. _duello_--L. _duellum_, the original form of
_bellum_--_duo_, two.]

DUENNA, d[=u]-en'a, _n._ an old lady who acts the part of governess in
Spain: an old lady who acts as guardian to a younger. [Sp. _dueña_, a form
of _doña_, mistress--L. _domina_, fem. of _dominus_, lord.]

DUET, d[=u]-et', DUETTO, d[=u]-et'o, _n._ a composition in music for two
voices, instruments, or instrumentalists.--_ns._ DUETTI'NO, a simple duet;
DUET'TIST. [It. _duetto_, _due_, two--L. _duo_, two.]

DUFF, duf, _n._ dough: a stiff flour pudding boiled in a bag; decaying
vegetable matter, fallen leaves: coaldust. [From _dough_.]

DUFF, duf, _v.t._ to manipulate an article so as to make it look like new:
to alter the brands on stolen cattle.

DUFFEL, duf'l, _n._ a thick, coarse woollen cloth, with a thick nap--also
DUFF'LE: (_U.S._) change of flannels. [Dut., from _Duffel_, a town near
Antwerp.]

DUFFER, duf'[.e]r, _n._ a dull plodding person: a fogy, useless old fellow:
a counterfeit coin: a claim or mine which proves unproductive.--_ns._
DUFF'ERDOM, DUFF'ERISM.

DUFFER, duf'[.e]r, _n._ a peddler of dubious goods, sham jewellery, &c.:
one who fakes up sham articles, or duffs cattle.

DUG, dug, _n._ the nipple of the pap, esp. applied to that of a cow or
other beast. [Cf. Sw. _dægga_, Dan. _dægge_, to suckle a child. See DAIRY.]

DUG, dug, _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ of DIG.--_n._ DUG'OUT, a boat made by
hollowing out the trunk of a tree.

DUGONG, d[=u]-gong', _n._ a kind of herb-eating whale, from 8 to 20 feet
long, found in Indian seas--the supposed original of the mermaid. [Malayan
_d[=u]yong_.]

DUIKER, DUYKER, d[=i]'k[.e]r, _n._ a small South African antelope. [Dut.]

[Illustration]

DUKE, d[=u]k, _n._ the highest order of nobility next below that of
_prince_: (_B._) a chieftain: on the Continent, a sovereign prince.--_ns._
DUKE'DOM, the title, rank, or territories of a duke; DUKE'LING, a petty
duke; DUK'ERY, a duke's territory or seat; DUKE'SHIP.--THE DUKERIES, a
group of ducal seats in Nottinghamshire. [O. Fr. _duc_--L. _dux_, _ducis_,
a leader--_duc[)e]re_, to lead.]

DULCAMARA, dul-ka-m[=a]'ra, _n._ a name for the Bittersweet (q.v.). [Formed
from L. _dulcis_, sweet, _amara_, bitter.]

DULCET, duls'et, _adj._ sweet to the taste, or to the ear: melodious,
harmonious.--_n._ DULCIFIC[=A]'TION.--_adj._ DULCIF'LUOUS, flowing
sweetly.--_v.t._ DUL'CIFY, to make sweet.--_ns._ DULCIL'OQUY, a soft manner
of speaking; DUL'CITE, DUL'CITOL, DUL'COSE, a saccharine substance derived
from various plants--in its crude form, _Madagascar manna_; DUL'CITUDE,
sweetness.--DULCIFIED SPIRIT, a compound of alcohol with mineral acid. [O.
Fr. _doucet_, dim. of _dols_ (Fr. _doux_)--L. _dulcis_, sweet.]

DULCIMER, dul'si-m[.e]r, _n._ a musical instrument resembling a flat box,
with sounding-board and bridges, across which run wires tuned by pegs at
the sides, and played on by striking the wires with a small piece of wood
in each hand, or more usually with two cork-headed hammers: a Jewish
musical instrument, according to Gesenius, a double pipe with a bag. [Sp.
_dulcemele_--L. _dulce melos_, a sweet song--_dulcis_, sweet; _melos_ = Gr.
_melos_, a song.]

DULCINEA, dul-sin'[=e]-a, or dul-sin-[=e]'a, _n._ sweetheart. [From
_Dulcinea_ del Toboso, the name given by Don Quixote to the mistress of his
imagination.]

DULE, dool, _n._ (_Scot._) woe.--_n._ DULE'-TREE, the gallows. [See DOLE.]

DULIA, d[=u]-l[=i]'a, _n._ (_R.C. Church_) that inferior veneration due to
saints and angels.--_n._ DULOC'RACY, government by slaves. [Gr.
_douleia_--_doulos_, a slave.]

DULL, dul, _adj._ slow of hearing, of learning, or of understanding:
insensible: without life or spirit: slow of motion: drowsy: sleepy: sad:
downcast: cheerless: not bright or clear: cloudy: dim, obscure: obtuse:
blunt.--_v.t._ to make dull or stupid: to blunt: to damp: to cloud.--_v.i._
to become dull.--_n._ DULL'ARD, a dull and stupid person: a dunce.--_adjs._
DULL'-BRAINED (_Shak._), of dull brain or intellect: stupid; DULL'-BROWED,
of gloomy brow or look; DULL'-EYED (_Shak._), having eyes dull or wanting
expression; DULL'ISH, somewhat dull: wearisome.--_ns._ DULL'NESS, DUL'NESS,
the stale or quality of being dull.--_adjs._ DULL'-SIGHT'ED; DULL'-WIT'TED;
DULL'Y, somewhat dull.--_adv._ DULL'Y. [A.S. _dol_--_dwelan_, to err; Dut.
_dol_, Ger. _toll_, mad.]

DULSE, duls, _n._ an edible seaweed, with red, deeply-divided fronds, eaten
in Ireland and elsewhere. [Gael, _duileasg_--_duille_, a leaf, _uisge_,
water.]

DULY, d[=u]'li, _adv._ properly: fitly: at the proper time. [See DUE.]

DUMB, dum, _adj._ without the power of speech: silent: soundless.--_v.t._
(_Shak._) to render dumb.--_n.pl._ DUMB'-BELLS, double-headed weights swung
in the hands for the purpose of developing the arms, muscles of the chest,
&c.--_n._ DUMB'-CANE, a plant of the order _Araceæ_, aberrant in its almost
arborescent character, but agreeing with them in its acridity, which is in
none of them more highly developed.--_adv._ DUMB'LY, in silence:
mutely.--_ns._ DUMB'NESS; DUMB'-SHOW, gesture without words: pantomime;
DUMB'-WAIT'ER, a movable platform used for conveying food, dishes, &c. at
meals: a stand with revolving top for holding dessert, &c.--_vs.t._
DUMFOUND', -ER, to strike dumb: to confuse greatly: to astonish.--_ns._
DUM'MERER, a dumb person, esp. a rogue who feigns dumbness; DUM'MINESS;
DUM'MY, one who is dumb: a mere tool of another, man of straw: a sham
package in a shop: the fourth or exposed band when three persons play at
whist.--STRIKE DUMB, to silence with astonishment. [A.S. _dumb_; Ger.
_dumm_, stupid, Dut. _dom_.]

DUMBLEDORE, dum'bl-d[=o]r, _n._ (_prov._) the bumble-bee: the brown
cockchafer.

DUM-DUM, dum'-dum, _n._ a soft-nosed expanding bullet, first made at _Dum
Dum_ in British India.

DUMOSE, d[=u]'m[=o]s, _adj._ thorny--also D[=U]'MOUS.--_n._ DUMOS'ITY. [L.
_dumus_, a thorn-bush.]

DUMP, dump, _v.t._ to throw down: to unload.--_n._ a thud: a place for the
discharge of loads, or for rubbish: (_pl._) money (_slang_). [Cf. Dan.
_dumpe_, Norw. _dumpa_, to fall plump.]

DUMP, dump, _n._ dullness or gloominess of mind, ill-humour, low
spirits--now only used in the _pl._: (_Shak._) a melancholy strain, any
tune.--_adj._ DUMP'ISH, depressed in spirits.--_adv._ DUMP'ISHLY.--_n._
DUMP'ISHNESS. [Prob. related to Old Dut. _domp_, mist; or Ger. _dumpf_,
gloomy.]

DUMP, dump, _n._ a deep hole in a river-bed, a pool. [Prob. Norse _dump_, a
pit.]

DUMPLING, dump'ling, _n._ a kind of thick pudding or mass of paste. [Dim.
of _dump_, in _dumpy_.]

DUMPY, dump'i, _adj._ short and thick.--_n._ a dumpy person or animal, esp.
one of a breed of very short-legged fowls.--_n._ DUMPI'NESS.--_v.t._
DUM'PLE, to make or cook, as a dumpling: to bend into a dumpy shape.--_n._
DUMP'Y-LEV'EL, a spirit-level used in surveying, having a short telescope
with a large aperture. [From a provincial form _dump_, a clumsy piece.]

DUN, dun, _adj._ of a dark colour, partly brown and black: dark.--_v.t._
(_U.S._) to cure and brown, as cod.--_v.i._ to become dun-coloured.--_ns._
DUN'-BIRD, the pochard; DUN'-COW, the shagreen ray; DUN'-D[=I]V'ER, the
merganser; DUN'-FISH, codfish cured by dunning.--_adj._ DUN'NISH, somewhat
dun. [A.S. _dun_, most prob. Celt.; W. _dwn_, dusky, Gael. _donn_, brown.]

DUN, dun, _v.t._ to demand a debt with din or noise: to urge for
payment:--_pr.p._ dun'ning; _pa.p._ dunned.--_n._ one who duns: a demand
for payment. [Allied to DIN.]

DUN, dun, _n._ a hill: a fortified mound. [A.S. _dún_--Celt.; in many
place-names, as _Dun_bar, _Don_caster.]

DUNCE, duns, _n._ one slow at learning: a stupid person.--_ns._ DUNCE'DOM,
the class of dunces; DUN'CERY, stupidity; DUN'CIAD, the epic of dunces, the
world of dunces--name of a famous poem by Pope.--_adjs._ DUN'CISH,
DUNCE'-LIKE. [_Duns_ Scotus (died 1308), the Subtle Doctor, leader of the
schoolmen, from him called _Dunses_, who opposed classical studies on the
revival of learning--hence any opposer of learning, a blockhead.]

DUNCH, dunsh, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to push with the elbow: to gore with the
horns, as a bull. [Hardly related to Sw. _dunka_, to beat; Dan. _dunke_, a
thump.]

DUNDER, dun'd[.e]r, _n._ lees, dregs.

DUNDERFUNK, dun'd[.e]r-fungk, _n._ ship-biscuit, soaked in water, mixed
with fat and molasses, and baked in a pan.--Also DAN'DYFUNK.

DUNDERHEAD, dun'd[.e]r-hed, _n._ a stupid person--also DUN'DERPATE.--_adj._
DUN'DERHEADED.--_n._ DUN'DER-HEADISM.

DUNDREARY, dun-dr[=e]r'i, _adj._ like Lord _Dundreary_--in Sothern's
creation of the part, a lisping and brainless dandy, wearing long
side-whiskers.

DUNE, d[=u]n, _n._ a low hill of sand on the seashore. [An earlier form of
_down_, a hill.]

DUNG, dung, _n._ the excrement of animals: refuse litter mixed with
excrement.--_v.t._ to manure with dung.--_v.i._ to void excrement.--_ns._
DUNG'-BEE'TLE, the dor-beetle: (_pl._) the scarabæoid beetles generally;
DUNG'-FORK, a fork used for moving stable manure; DUNG'HILL, a heap of
dung: any mean situation; DUNG'MERE, a manure-pit.--_adj._ DUNG'Y. [A.S.
_dung_; cf. Dan. _dynge_, a heap; Ger. _dung_.]

DUNGAREE, dung'ga-ri, _n._ a coarse Indian calico: (_pl._) trousers of
such.--Also DUNG'EREE. [Hindi.]

DUNGEON, dun'jun, _n._ (_orig._) the principal tower of a castle: a close,
dark prison: a cell under ground.--_v.t._ to confine in a dungeon.--_n._
DUN'GEONER, a gaoler. [O. Fr. _donjon_--Low L. _domnion-em_--L. _dominus_,
a lord.]

DUNKER, dungk'[.e]r, _n._ a member of a sect of German-American Baptists
who practise triple immersion.--Also TUNK'ER. [Ger.]

DUNLIN, dun'lin, _n._ the red-backed sandpiper. [A dim. of _dun_.]

DUNLOP, dun-lop', _n._ a rich cheese made of unskimmed milk--from _Dunlop_
in Ayrshire.

DUNNAGE, dun'[=a]j, _n._ on shipboard, a name applied to loose wood of any
kind laid in the bottom of the hold to keep the cargo out of the
bilge-water, or wedged between parts of the cargo to keep them steady.
[Ety. unknown.]

DUNNIEWASSAL, DUNIWASSAL, dun-i-was'al, _n._ (_Scot._) a gentleman of
inferior rank. [Gael. _duin' uasal_--_duine_, a man, _uasal_, gentle.]

DUNNING, dun'ing, _n._ the process of browning and curing cod-fish.

DUNNOCK, dun'ok, _n._ the hedge-sparrow.

DUNNY, dun'i, _adj._ (_prov._) deaf.

DUNSTABLE, dun'stä-bl, _n._ a hat, bonnet, &c. of plaited straw, first made
at _Dunstable_ in Bedfordshire.--DUNSTABLE ROAD, HIGHWAY, anything plain
and direct.

DUNT, dunt, _n._ (_Scot._) a blow or stroke, the wound made by
such.--_v.t._ to strike, beat. [See DINT.]

DUNT, dunt, _n._ (_prov._) the gid or sturdy in sheep, &c.

DUO, d[=u]'o, _n._ a song in two parts. [L. _duo_, two.]

DUODECAHEDRON, d[=u]-o-dek-a-h[=e]'dron, _n._ Same as DODECAHEDRON.

DUODECENNIAL, d[=u]-o-de-sen'i-al, _adj._ occurring every twelve years. [L.
_duodecim_, twelve, _annus_, year.]

DUODECIMAL, d[=u]-o-des'i-mal, _adj._ computed by twelves: twelfth: (_pl._)
a method of calculating the area of a rectangle when the length and breadth
are stated in feet and inches.--_adjs._ DUODECIM'FID, divided into twelve
parts; DUODEC'IMO, formed of sheets folded so as to make twelve
leaves.--_n._ a book of such sheets--usually written 12mo.--DUODECIMAL
SCALE, the name given to the division of unity into twelve equal parts. [L.
_duodecim_, twelve--_duo_, two, and _decem_, ten.]

DUODECUPLE, d[=u]-o-dek'[=u]-pl, _adj._ twelvefold: consisting of twelve.
[L. _duodecim_, _plic[=a]re_, to fold.]

DUODENARY, d[=u]-[=o]-den'a-ri, _adj._ relating to twelve, twelvefold.

DUODENUM, d[=u]-o-d[=e]'num, _n._ the first portion of the small
intestines, so called because about twelve fingers'-breadth in
length:--_pl._ DUOD[=E]'NA.--_adj._ DUOD[=E]'NAL. [Formed from L.
_duodeni_, twelve each.]

DUOLITERAL, d[=u]-[=o]-lit'er-al, _adj._ consisting of two letters.

DUOLOGUE, d[=u]'[=o]-log, _n._ a piece spoken between two.

DUOMO, d[=u]-[=o]'mo, _n._ a cathedral. [It. See DOME.]

DUP, dup, _v.t._ (_Shak._) to undo a door. [From _do_ and _up_. Cf. _don_
and _doff_.]

DUPE, d[=u]p, _n._ one easily cheated: one who is deceived or
misled.--_v.t._ to deceive: to trick.--_n._ DUPABIL'ITY.--_adj._
D[=U]'PABLE.--_n._ D[=U]'PERY, the art of deceiving others. [Fr. _dupe_; of
uncertain origin.]

DUPION, d[=u]'pi-on, _n._ a cocoon spun by two silkworms together, also the
silk of such.--Also DOU'PION. [Fr.]

DUPLEX, d[=u]'pleks, _adj._ twofold: double.--_adjs._ D[=U]'PLE, double:
twofold; D[=U]'PLICATE, double: twofold.--_n._ another thing of the same
kind: a copy or transcript.--_v.t._ to double: to fold.--_n._
DUPLIC[=A]'TION.--_adj._ D[=U]'PLICATIVE.--_ns._ D[=U]'PLICATURE, a
doubling: anything doubled: the fold of a membrane; DUPLIC'ITY, doubleness:
insincerity of heart or speech: deceit; D[=U]'PLY, a second reply in Scots
law.--THE DUPLICATION OF THE CUBE was a problem eagerly discussed by the
early Greek geometers. [L. _duplic[=a]re_, _-[=a]tum_--_duplex_--_duo_,
two, _plic[=a]re_, to fold.]

DURA. See DURRA.

DURABLE, d[=u]r'a-bl, _adj._ able to last or endure: hardy:
permanent.--_ns._ DUR'ABLENESS, DURABIL'ITY, quality of being durable:
power of resisting decay.--_adv._ DUR'ABLY.--_ns._ DUR'ANCE, continuance:
imprisonment: duress; DUR'ANT, a strong cloth in imitation of buff-leather;
DUR[=A]'TION, continuance in time: time indefinitely: power of continuance.
[Fr.,--L. _durabilis_--_dur[=a]re_, to last.]

DURA MATER, d[=u]'ra m[=a]'t[.e]r, _n._ the exterior membrane of the brain
and spinal column distinguished from the other two, the arachnoid and the
pia mater.

DURAMEN, d[=u]-r[=a]'m[.e]n, _n._ the inner and fully ripened wood of
dicotyledonous trees. [L.,--_durus_, hard.]

DURBAR, dur'bar, _n._ an audience-chamber: a reception or levee, esp. a
reception of native princes held by the Viceroy of India: the body of
officials at a native court. [Pers. _dar-bár_, a prince's court, lit. a
'_door_ of _admittance_.']

DURDUM. Same as DIRDUM.

DURE, d[=u]r, _v.i._ (_obs._) to endure, last, or continue.--_adj._
DURE'FUL (_Spens._), enduring, lasting. [Fr. _durer_--L.
_dur[=a]re_--_durus_, hard.]

DURESS, d[=u]r'es, or d[=u]r-es', _n._ constraint: imprisonment: constraint
illegally exercised to force a person to perform some act. [O. Fr.
_duresse_--L. _duritia_--_durus_, hard.]

DURGA, d[=oo]r'ga, the wife of Siva (q.v.).

DURGAN, dur'gan, _n._ a dwarf, any undersized creature.--_adj._ DUR'GY.
[Related to _dwarf_.]

DURHAM, dur'am, _n._ one of a particular breed of shorthorned cattle--from
the English county.

DURIAN, d[=u]'ri-an, _n._ a lofty Indian and Malayan fruit-tree (genus
_Durio_), with leaves resembling those of the cherry, and large bunches of
pale-yellow flowers.--Also D[=U]'RION. [Malay _duryon_.]

DURING, d[=u]'ring, _prep._ for the time a thing lasts: in the course of.
[Orig. pr.p. of obs. _dure_, to last.]

DURMAST, dur'mast, _n._ a sub-species or variety of oak.

DURN, durn, _n._ (_prov._) a door-post.--Also DERN.

DUROY, d[=u]-roi', _n._ an obsolete form of _corduroy_.

DURRA, dur'ra, _n._ a genus of grasses closely allied to sugar-cane and
beard-grass--also called _Durra millet_ and _Indian millet_ or _Sorgho
grass_. Much cultivated in Asia, Africa, and the south of Europe.--Also
DOUR'A, DHUR'RA, and DUR'A. [Ar.]

DURST, durst, _pa.t._ of DARE, to venture. [A.S. _dorste_, pa.t. of _dear_,
to dare.]

DUSH, dush, _v.t._ (_Scot._) to throw down.

DUSK, dusk, _adj._ darkish: of a dark colour.--_n._ twilight: partial
darkness: darkness of the colour.--_v.t._ to occasion a dusky
appearance.--_v.i._ DUSK'EN, to grow dark.--_adv._ DUSK'ILY.--_n._
DUSK'INESS.--_adj._ DUSK'ISH, rather dusky: slightly dark or black.--_adv._
DUSK'ISHLY.--_n._ DUSK'ISHNESS.--_adv._ DUSK'LY.--_n._ DUSK'NESS.--_adj._
DUSK'Y, partially dark or obscure: dark-coloured: sad: gloomy. [A.S. _dox_,
_dosc_, dark--further history of word obscure.]

DUST, dust, _n._ fine particles of matter: a cloud of powdery matter
present in the atmosphere: powder: earth: the grave, where the body becomes
dust: a mean condition: gold-dust--hence money.--_v.t._ to free from dust:
to sprinkle with dust.--_ns._ DUST'-BALL, a disease of horses, in which
grain-dust forms a ball in the intestine; DUST'-BIN, a bucket, box, &c. for
holding dust and rubbish; DUST'-BRAND, smut (q.v.); DUST'-BRUSH, a light
brush for removing dust from walls, &c.; DUST'-CART, a cart for conveying
dust and rubbish from the streets; DUST'-CONTRACT'OR, one who has made a
contract to remove dust, &c., as from yards; DUST'ER, one who dusts: a
cloth or brush used for removing dust; DUST'-HOLE, a dust-bin; DUST'INESS;
DUST'MAN, a scavenger; DUST'-PAN, a pan or shovel for removing dust swept
from the floor.--_adj._ DUST'Y, covered or sprinkled with dust: like
dust.--_ns._ DUST'Y-FOOT (see PIE-POWDER); DUST'Y-MILL'ER, the auricula,
from the white dust upon its leaves.--DUST A PERSON'S JACKET, to give him a
drubbing.--BITE THE DUST (see BITE); DOWN WITH THE DUST, pay down the
money, originally with reference to gold-_dust_; KICK UP A DUST, to make a
stir or uproar; RAISE A DUST, to create a disturbance; THROW DUST IN A
PERSON'S EYES, to delude or deceive a person. [A.S. _dúst_; cf. Ger.
_dunst_, vapour, Dut. _duist_, meal-dust.]

DUTCH, duch, _adj._ belonging to Holland or its people--in old writers
rather applied to the Germans: heavy, clumsy, as in _Dutch-built_,
_-buttocked_, &c.--_n._ DUTCH'MAN, a native of Holland.--DUTCH AUCTION,
COURAGE, TILES (see AUCTION, COURAGE, TILE); DUTCH CARPET, a mixed material
of cotton and wool for floor coverings; DUTCH CHEESE, a small round cheese
made on the Continent from skim-milk; DUTCH CLINKERS, a hard brick for
paving stables, &c.; DUTCH CLOVER, white clover; DUTCH CONCERT, a concert
in which singers sing their various songs simultaneously, or each one sings
a verse of any song he likes between bursts of some familiar chorus; DUTCH
DROPS, a balsam, or popular nostrum, of oil of turpentine, tincture of
guaiacum, &c.; DUTCH LIQUID, an oily substance obtained by mixing chlorine
and olefiant gases--not miscible with water, readily dissolving in ether
and alcohol, producing anæsthesia; DUTCH METAL, sometimes called _Dutch
gold_ or _Dutch leaf_, is an alloy of copper and zinc; DUTCH OVEN (see
OVEN); DUTCH PINK (see PINK); DUTCH RUSH, the scouring-rush; DUTCH WIFE, an
open frame of rattan or cane used in the Dutch Indies, to rest the limbs
upon in bed.--TALK LIKE A DUTCH UNCLE, to rebuke with kindness. [Ger.
_deutsch_, (lit.) belonging to the people--Old High Ger. _diutisk_, of
which _-isk_ = the Eng. suffix _-ish_, and _diut_ = A.S. _theod_, Goth.
_thiuda_, a nation. See TEUTONIC.]

DUTY, d[=u]'ti, _n._ that which is due: what one is bound by any obligation
to do: obedience: military service: respect or regard: one's proper
business: tax on goods.--_adj._ D[=U]'TEOUS, devoted to duty:
obedient.--_adv._ D[=U]'TEOUSLY.--_n._ D[=U]'TEOUSNESS.--_adjs._
D[=U]'TIABLE, subject to custom duty; D[=U]'TIED, subjected to duties and
customs; D[=U]'TIFUL, attentive to duty: respectful: expressive of a sense
of duty.--_adv._ D[=U]'TIFULLY.--_n._ D[=U]'TIFULNESS.--_adj._
D[=U]'TY-FREE, free from tax or duty. [Formed from Anglo-Fr. _deu_ or _due_
(mod. Fr. _dú_) and suffix _-ty_. See DUE (1).]

DUUMVIRATE, d[=u]-um'vi-r[=a]t, _n._ the union of two men in the same
office: a form of government in ancient Rome.--_n._ D[=U]UM'VIR, one of two
associated in the same office.--_adj._ D[=U]UM'VIRAL. [L. _duo_, two, and
_vir_, a man.]

DUVET, dü-v[=a]', _n._ a quilt stuffed with eider-down or swan's-down.
[Fr.]

DUX, duks, _n._ a leader: the head boy in a school or class. [L., a
leader.]

DWALE, dw[=a]l, _n._ (_bot._) deadly nightshade: a stupefying drink:
(_her._) a black colour. [Ice. _dvöl_, _dvali_, delay, sleep.]

DWALE, dw[=a]l, _n._ (_obs._) error: a heretic.--_adj._ perverse. [A.S.
_dwala_, error.]

DWALM, DWAUM, dwäm, _n._ (_Scot._) a swoon, a sudden sickness.--_v.i._ to
fail in health. [A.S. _dwolma_, confusion.]

DWARF, dwawrf, _n._ an animal or plant that does not reach the ordinary
height: a diminutive man.--_v.t._ to hinder from growing: to make to appear
small.--_adjs._ DWARF'ISH, DWARF, like a dwarf: very small:
despicable.--_adv._ DWARF'ISHLY.--_n._ DWARF'ISHNESS.--DWARFED TREES, small
trees growing in flower-pots, a characteristic ornament in Chinese and
Japanese houses and gardens. [A.S. _dweorg_; Dut. _dwerg_, Ice. _dvergr_,
Ger. _zwerg_.]

DWELL, dwel, _v.i._ to abide in a place: to remain: to rest the attention:
to continue long.--_v.t._ (_Milt._) to inhabit, to place:--_pr.p._
dwell'ing; _pa.t._ and _pa.p._ dwelled or dwelt.--_ns._ DWELL'ER;
DWELL'ING, the place where one dwells: habitation: continuance;
DWELL'ING-HOUSE, a house used as a dwelling, in distinction from a place of
business or other building; DWELL'ING-PLACE, a place of residence. [A.S.
_dwellan_, to cause to wander, to delay, from _dwal_ or _dol_, the original
of Eng. _dull_.]

DWINDLE, dwin'dl, _v.i._ to grow less: to waste away: to grow feeble: to
become degenerate.--_v.t._ to lessen.--_n._ decline.--_n._ DWIN'DLEMENT.
[Dim. of DWINE.]

DWINE, dw[=i]n, _v.i._ to pine: (_Scot._) to waste away. [A.S. _dwínan_, to
fade; cf. Ice. _dvína_, Dan. _tvine_, to pine away.]

DYAD, d[=i]'ad, _n._ a pair of units treated as one: (_chem._) an atom,
radical, or element having a combining power of two units: (_biol._) a
secondary unit of organisation consisting of an aggregate of
monads.--_adj._ DYAD'IC.

DYAK, d[=i]'ak, _n._ the Malay name for the race who constitute the bulk of
the aboriginal population of Borneo, divided into innumerable tribes,
differing pretty widely in language, customs, and degrees of
savageness.--Also DAY'AK.

DYE, d[=i], _n._ (_Spens._). Same as DIE (2).

DYE, d[=i], _v.t._ to stain: to give a new colour to:--_pr.p._ dye'ing;
_pa.p._ dyed.--_n._ colour: tinge: stain: a colouring liquid.--_ns._
DYE'-HOUSE, a building in which dyeing is done; DYE'ING, the art of
imparting colours to textile and other materials, such as cotton, silk,
wool, and leather; DY'ER, one whose trade is to dye cloth, &c.;
DY'ER'S-BROOM, a European shrubby plant, thoroughly naturalised in some
parts of North America--a well-known source of yellow colouring matter;
DY'ER'S-WEED, the woad, weld, or yellow weed, yielding a yellow dye;
DYE'-STUFF, material used in dyeing; DYE'-WOOD, any wood from which
material is obtained for dyeing; DYE'-WORK, an establishment for dyeing.
[A.S. _deágan_, to dye, from _deág_ or _deáh_, colour.]

DYING, d[=i]'ing, _pr.p._ of DIE.--_adj._ destined for death: mortal:
declining: occurring immediately before death, as dying words: supporting a
dying person, as a dying-bed: pertaining to death.--_n._ death.--_adv._
DY'INGLY.--_n._ DY'INGNESS.--DYING DECLARATION (_law_), the declaration
made by a person convinced of his impending death, and who does not expect
to survive the trial of the accused. [See DIE (1).]

DYKE. Same as DIKE.

DYNACTINOMETER, din-ak-tin-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring
the actinic force of light. [Gr. _dynamis_, force, _aktis_, _aktinos_, a
ray, _metron_, a measure.]

DYNAM, d[=i]'nam, _n._ a unit of work, a foot-pound: the resultant of all
the forces acting on a body.

DYNAMETER, d[=i]-nam'e-t[.e]r, _n._ an instrument for measuring the
magnifying power of a telescope.--_adj._ DYNAMET'RICAL, pertaining to a
dynameter. [Gr. _dynamis_, power, and _metron_, a measure.]

DYNAMIC, -AL, di-nam'ik, -al, _adj._ relating to force: relating to the
effects of forces in nature: causal.--_n._ DYNAM'IC, a moving
force.--_adv._ DYNAM'ICALLY.--_ns._ DYNAM'ICS, the science which treats of
matter and motion, where the nature of the moving body and the cause of its
motion are both considered; DY'NAMISM, a theory which explains the
phenomena of the universe by some immanent energy: operation of force;
DY'NAMIST.--_adj._ DYNAMIS'TIC. [Gr. _dynamikos_--_dynamis_,
power--_dynasthai_, to be able.]

DYNAMITE, din'a-m[=i]t, _n._ a powerful explosive agent, consisting of
absorbent matter, as porous silica, saturated with nitro-glycerine.--_v.t._
to blow up with dynamite.--_ns._ DYN'AMITARD, DYN'AMITER, a ruffian who
would use dynamite to destroy bridges, gaols, &c. [Gr. _dynamis_.]

DYNAMO, d[=i]'na-mo, _n._ a contraction of DYNAMO-ELECTRIC MACHINE, a
machine for generating electric currents by means of the relative movement
of conductors and magnets.--_adjs._ DY'NAMO-ELECTRIC, -AL.--_ns._
DYNAMOG'ENY, production of increased nervous activity; DYNAM'OGRAPH, a
recording dynamometer: an instrument for marking the degree of compression
of an elliptic spring.

DYNAMOMETER, din-am-om'e-t[.e]r, _n._ originally an instrument for
measuring force, such as the pull exerted by a horse in drawing a cart: the
name now usually given to instruments for measuring power.--_adjs._
DYNAMOMET'RIC, -AL. [Gr. _dynamis_, power, and _metron_, a measure.]

DYNASTY, din'as-ti, or d[i]'nas-ti, _n._ a succession of kings of the same
family.--_n._ DY'NAST, a ruler.--_adj._ DYNAS'TIC, belonging to a dynasty.
[Gr. _dynasteia_--_dynast[=e]s_, a lord, _dynasthai_, to be able.]

DYNE, d[=i]n, _n._ the unit of force in the centimetre-gramme-second
(C.G.S.) system.

DYOPHYSITE, d[=i]-of'i-z[=i]t, _n._ a holder of the doctrine of the
coexistence of two natures, the divine and the human, in Christ--also
DIPH'YSITE.--_adjs._ DYOPHYSIT'IC, -AL.--_n._ DYOPH'YSITISM.

DYOTHELETE, d[=i]-oth'e-l[=e]t, _adj._ holding the doctrine that Christ had
two wills, a divine and a human--also DYOTH'ELITE.--_n._ one who holds the
foregoing.--_ns._ DYOTH'ELITISM, DYOTH'ELISM.

DYSÆSTHESIA, dis-es-th[=e]'si-a, _n._ impaired sensation, partial
insensibility.--_adj._ DYSÆSTHETIC. [Gr., _dys_, hard,
_aisth[=e]tos_--_aisthanesthai_, to feel.]

DYSCHROA, dis'kr[=o]-a, _n._ discoloration of the skin from disease.--Also
DYS'CHROIA.

DYSCRASIA, dis-kr[=a]'si-a, _n._ (_path._) an altered condition of the
blood and fluids of the system, leading to constitutional diseases, as
dropsy, cancer, delirium tremens, lead-poisoning, &c. [From Gr. _dys_, bad,
_krasis_, a mixture.]

DYSENTERY, dis'en-ter-i, _n._ a form of disease accompanied by discharges
from the bowels, and differing from diarrhoea chiefly in being attended by
marked fever and pain, as also by the presence of blood and inflammatory
products in the discharges. It is a disease of the mucous membrane of the
colon or great intestine.--_adj._ DYSENTER'IC. [Gr. _dysenteria_, _dys_,
ill, _entera_, entrails.]

DYSLOGISTIC, dis-l[=o]-jis'tik, _adj._ conveying censure,
opprobrious.--_adv._ DYSLOGIS'TICALLY.--_n._ DYS'LOGY, dispraise.

DYSMENORRHOEA, dis-men-[=o]-r[=e]'a, _n._ difficult or painful
menstruation.--_adjs._ DYSMENORRHOE'AL, -IC.

DYSNOMY, dis'n[=o]-mi, _n._ bad legislation.

DYSODYLE, -ILE, dis'[=o]-d[=i]l, _n._ a yellow or grayish laminated
bituminous mineral, often found with lignite, burning vividly, with an
odour of asafoetida. [Gr. _dys[=o]d[=e]s_--_dys_, ill, _ozein_, to smell.]

DYSOPSIA, dis-op'si-a, _n._ dimness or difficulty of vision.--Also
DYS[=O]'PIA, DYSOP'SY.

DYSOREXIA, dis-[=o]-rek'si-a, _n._ an impaired or depraved appetite.--Also
DYS'OREXY.

DYSPATHY, dis'pa-thi, _n._ antipathy, dislike--opposite of
_Sympathy_.--_adj._ DYSPATHET'IC.

DYSPEPSIA, dis-pep'si-a, _n._ a scientific term for indigestion--also
DYSPEP'SY.--_n._ DYSPEP'TIC, a person afflicted with dyspepsia.--_adjs._
DYSPEP'TIC, -AL, afflicted with, pertaining to, or arising from
indigestion.--_adv._ DYSPEP'TICALLY. [Gr. _dyspepsia_--_dys_, hard,
_pessein_, _pepsein_, to digest.]

DYSPHAGIA, dis-f[=a]'ji-a, _n._ difficulty in swallowing--also
DYS'PHAGY.--_adj._ DISPHAG'IC.

DYSPHONIA, dis-f[=o]'ni-a, _n._ difficulty in producing sounds. [Gr. _dys_,
ill, _ph[=o]n[=e]_, sound.]

DYSPHORIA, dis-f[=o]'ri-a, _n._ impatience under affliction, morbid
restlessness.

DYSPHUISTIC, dis-f[=u]-is'tik, _adj._ ill-sounding, inelegant.

DYSPNOEA, disp-n[=e]'a, _n._ difficulty of breathing.--_adjs._ DYSPNOE'AL,
DYSPNOE'IC. [Gr. _dys_, ill, _pno[=e]_, breathing.]

DYSTELEOLOGY, dis-tel-[=e]-ol'o-ji, _n._ the doctrine of purposelessness,
or denial of 'final causes:' the study of apparently functionless
rudimentary organs in animals and plants.--_adj._ DYSTELEOLOG'ICAL.--_n._
DYSTELEOL'OGIST.

DYSTHESIA, dis-th[=e]'si-a, _n._ a morbid habit of body, resulting in
general discomfort and impatience.--_adj._ DYSTHET'IC.

DYSTHYMIC, dis-thim'ik, _adj._ depressed in spirits.

DYSTOMIC, dis-tom'ik, _adj._ having an imperfect fracture or
cleavage.--Also DYS'TOMOUS.

DYSURIA, dis-[=u]'ri-a, _n._ a difficulty of passing urine--also
DYS'URY.--_adj._ DYS[=U]'RIC. [Gr. _dys_, ill, _ouron_, urine.]

DYTISCUS, d[=i]-tis'kus, _n._ a genus of water-beetles, including a common
large British species, _D. marginalis_--also DYT'ICUS.--_adj._ DYTIS'CID.
[Formed from Gr. _dyt[=e]s_, a diver.]

DYVOUR, d[=i]'v[=oo]r, _n._ (_Scot._) a bankrupt.--_n._ DYV'OURY,
bankruptcy. [Generally conn. with Fr. _devoir_, to owe. The old phrase
'drowned in debt' suggests a connection with _diver_.]

DZEREN, dz[=e]'ren, _n._ the Mongolian antelope.--Also DZ[=E]'RON--called
also _Goitered antelope_, _Yellow goat_.

DZIGGETAI, dzig'ge-t[=i], _n._ a species of wild ass, more horse-like than
the others, inhabiting the elevated steppes of Tartary--prob. the
_hemionus_ (half-ass) of Herodotus and Pliny. [Mongol.]

       *       *       *       *       *


Corrections made to printed original.

Under "Accomplish":--"especially graceful acquirements"; "grateful" in
original.

Under "Aflame":--"Pfx. a-, and Flame."; "Pfx. a-, and Glowing." in
original.

Under "Aphaniptera":--"adj. Aphanip'terous"; "Appenip'terous" in original.

Under "Appreciate":--"rise in exchangeable value"; "risk" in original.

Under "Artichoke":--"girasole ('turn-sun')"; "girasole ('twin-sun')" in
original.

Under "Begonia":--"'Elephant's Ears,'"; "'Elephant's,' 'Earl's,'" in
original.

Under "Catenary":--"v.t. Catenate", the word "Catenate" is missing in the
original.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chambers's Twentieth Century
Dictionary (part 1 of 4: A-D), by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHAMBERS'S 20TH CENT. DICTIONARY. (A-D) ***

***** This file should be named 37683-8.txt or 37683-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/6/8/37683/

Produced by Keith Edkins, Colin Bell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
